MONTANA STATE UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

ia
ee
=
a aftas

The Future of Democracy in Iran
REZA

PAHLAVI

Since 1947

REGNERY
PUBLISHING,

INC.

An Eagle Publishing Company « Washington, DC

Copyright © 2002 by Reza Pahlavi

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means electronic or mechanical, including photocopy,
recording, or any information storage and retrieval system now known or to be
invented, without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer
who wishes to quote brief passages in connection with a review written for inclusion in a magazine, newspaper, or broadcast.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Pahlavi, Reza, 1960—

Winds of change : the future of democracy in Iran / Reza Pahlavi.
p. cm.
ISBN 0-89526-191-X
1. Democracy—Iran. 2. Iran—Politics and government—1979- I. Title.

JQ1789.A15 P35 2001
320.955—de21
2001048440

Published in the United States by
Regnery Publishing, Inc.

F

An Eagle Publishing Company
One Massachusetts Avenue, NW

Washington, DC 20001
www.regnery.com

Distributed to the trade by
National Book Network
4720-A Boston Way
Lanham, MD 20706

Printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

10098
7
6.5) 43) 20
BOOK DESIGN BY JULIE LAPPEN
SET IN GARAMOND 3

Books are available in quantity for promotional or premium use. Write to
Director of Special Sales, Regnery Publishing, Inc., One Massachusetts Avenue,
NW, Washington, DC 20001, for information on discounts and terms or call

(202) 216-0600.

To the memory of
all our fallen heroes and patriots

To learn more about Reza Pahlavi and the campaign

to bring secularism and democracy to Iran,
visit www.rezapahlavi.org

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

1 MY

2

VISION

IRAN

3 OIL,

4

AT

5 THE

AND

THE

ENERGY,

FOREIGN

1

OUTLOOK

15

CROSSROADS

35

AND

47

THE

POLICY

IRANIAN

61

DIASPORA

6 CONSTITUTIONAL

7 NONVIOLENCE
Elvi

8 THE

ECONOMY

MONARCHY

69

vies

AND

DISOBEDIENCE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

93

103

CONCLUSION

147

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

151

aaaswient ata)
,

pay

INTRODUCTION

his book is dedicated to the future of
Iran and to my compatriots, especially
today’s young generation. Each one of

| us wants the best for our country, even
when our views differ on how to achieve it. But at this
point in our history, our situation is tragic. Our coun-

try is mired in backwardness, obscurantism, rigidity,
radicalism, poverty, corruption, and incivility—all at
the hands of a clerical dictatorship. Yet our country-

men everywhere yearn to move Iran back into the

modern age and to build a future that reflects our historic aspirations achieved through the natural gifts of
our people.

2

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

I strongly believe that, as much as possible, people need to be aware of all the visions and ideas avail-

able, before they can make a responsible choice. For
this reason I have written this book: to inform my
compatriots as well as all other interested persons of
my vision of Iran’s future.
In one sense, I have a special connection to Iran’s
past through the circumstances of my birth. But in

another sense, I am

just another Iranian, deeply

disturbed by the present and seriously concerned
about the future of my country. I write as a passionate citizen with a deep sense of duty. Along with
many of my dedicated and committed compatriots,

I look at our national predicament and strive to find
solutions.

It may come as a great surprise to millions of

Iranians that I am often thought to hold certain
notions that have no part in my thinking process. It

is precisely for this reason that I have put my principles and ideas in writing so that my compatriots, no
matter where they may be, can not only evaluate for

themselves what I actually think, but also prepare

INTRODUCTION

3

themselves for the challenges that lie ahead as we
strive to carry out our patriotic and civic duties.

I am often asked about my views regarding the
era preceding the clerical regime. Clearly, there are
legitimate reasons for criticizing various issues and

factors that contributed to the political crisis resulting in clerical rule. In retrospect,

however,

most

Iranians will agree with me that Iran would have

taken a different path, which would have brought us
different results, had it had a chance to weather the

storm and fine-tune its course, rather than abandon

altogether what existed.

Each one of us has ideas about how our past
national leaders could have best advanced our country. As a heterogeneous society, gifted with a rich and
complex cultural and political history, Iranians have a

multitude of views about past controversies. It will
serve little constructive purpose to rehash old arguments. This book is about our future, our goals, our

passionate desire to find solutions, our collective need
to move forward in the interest of today’s youth, and

for the sake of our future generations.

4

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

Today, Iranians remain greatly worried about the

state of their homeland. We suffer insurmountable
economic problems under the present regime; we are
ruled by a theocracy that is out of touch with our peo-

ple’s real aspirations while the future of our nation is
a daily concern.

It is easy to talk about determining our own
future, but, of course, much harder to achieve it. As

noted, Iran has a politically diverse society, with a

broad spectrum of outlooks, philosophies, and ideologies. There are leftists and rightists, monarchists and
republicans, conservatives, centrists, and liberals—all

of whom love their country, but who envision its

future development from different perspectives.
As a diverse society, one of our main challenges is
to demonstrate our ability to agree on a common
agenda for the salvation of our homeland. My objective

is to rally the people of Iran under one basic principle
without advocating any particular ideology or form of

government, in the sense of preempting a due politi-

cal process. It advocates what I believe to be a common
denominator for the good of all: self-determination.

INTRODUCTION

5

My goal is to encourage Iranians to set aside

their differences, to eschew their personal ideals and
political ideologies. I ask them to consider adopting

this basic agenda:
To promote a national consensus on key issues
such

as

the

need

for democracy,

secularism,

human rights, and popular sovereignty;
To adopt a robust yet nonviolent political strat-

egy for bringing about political change;
To set the stage for an all-inclusive national
referendum,

with

international

observation,

enabling the people of Iran to determine the

type of democratic government they wish for
their homeland.

It is neither my role nor my responsibility to predetermine what specific social, economic and political

program

is best for Iran in the coming decades.

Instead, I do feel an obligation to set forth my own
views on the present crisis, how we can change the situation, and how we can work together to build a new

society and political order that reflect the will of the

6

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

people. I do not represent any particular group in Iran,

but the interests of all. I hope to reach as many people
as possible across a wide spectrum. I want to talk about
issues that concern all of us, both within the country

and among the large Iranian community abroad, many
of whom are looking forward to the day they will
finally be able to return home, roll up their sleeves,
and contribute to the development of their country.
As a member of a generation that has been a victim of circumstances, I too share the pain. Like others

in my generation, I have been deeply aftected, by the

events of the last few decades. But unlike others, I
carry the heavy burden of public expectations that
come with my name.

Sadly, I was forced to live in exile. But because of

it, I have benefited from the opportunity to live
among individuals from all walks of life. My unrestricted encounters and in-depth conversations with

people, some of them with no knowledge of who I
was, have exposed me to the reality of their lives, thus

enlightening and preparing me in ways unimaginable
before my exile.

Not many with my background have

INTRODUCTION

Ue

had the opportunity to develop their views, unfil-

tered, by having also had the experience of living as a
regular citizen—the opportunity to travel around the
world and experience different cultures, values, and

political environments, like everyone else.
In the last twenty-one years, many Iranians have

had varied opinions and expectations about the nature
of my role in leading our national struggle for freedom.
While some have sought to define my role exclusively
through the prism of a 2,500-year-old institution—

the monarchy—I see myself, beyond the implications

of my last name, as an Iranian burdened with the
responsibility to look to the future, not the past. Today,
our national commitment must be to unify our voices,
put an end to repression, and bring solid democratic
footing to our homeland. Whether as a nation we then

opt for a constitutional monarchy or a republic will be

exclusively determined by the people of Iran by means
of a democratic process: a national referendum.
Clearly, Iranians will have little tolerance for
individual absolute rule—be it that of a monarch, a

president, or a supreme clerical leader. A democratic

8

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

Iran will guarantee a system of government, popu-

larly based, and with clear delineation of power with
“checks and balances.” This will ensure a vibrant

civil society wherein people of different ethnicities,
religions, socioeconomic groups, and political per-

suasions will coexist peacefully while rebuilding
their homeland.

For the world community, Iran remains a complex

problem. For over two decades, it has experienced an
Iran

mired

with

chaos,

violence,

the

seizure

of

hostages, angry mobs, senseless slogans, war, murder,

and assassinations—in short, a total disregard for fundamental human values and civility.
Yet, at the time of this writing, the American

government, other major world powers, and particularly the Western media have persisted in inaccurately

portraying the political dynamics in Iran as a struggle
between a “reformist” Mr. Khatami and “radical con-

servatives.” Understandably, the world community is
puzzled about how to react to Iran: which statement,
which slogan, which faction, and which promise to
believe?

INTRODUCTION

9

The real struggle taking shape in Iran today is
not between Khatami and other clerics; rather, it is

the forces of state despotism and terrorism against an
emerging popular movement that demands democracy, rejects militant fundamentalism, and repudiates “supreme rule,” allegedly by “divine right.”

Today’s generation of young Iranians who grew
up after the 1979 upheaval will soon make up threequarters of the population. The relevant questions

that ought to be asked about Iran are: What is the
composition of this emerging generation? What are
its aspirations? Where does it want to go from here?
It is incumbent upon the older generation to be
in touch with the younger generation and to keep

these questions always in the forefront. Failure to
notice and close any gap that may exist between their

outlook and that of today’s youth would seriously
challenge our national opportunity to bring about
change to our political predicament. The ability to

address the demands of our citizens must be the only
litmus test for any government that aims to bring

progress to our homeland.

10

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

Where do we go from here? Iran can ill afford yet

another bloody upheaval. Instead, we must look for
ways to implement and accelerate an evolutionary

process out of our current impasse. My passion and
personal commitment

is to bring about political

change in Iran by way of civil disobedience and nonviolent action.
Most Iranians today are deeply discouraged by

the state of our nation. Ever since the clerics took
over, the very word “Iranian” has taken on a negative

connotation in the minds of many around the world,
which unfairly associates it with savagery, injustice,

and fanaticism. This negative image has deeply trou-

bled many in our state of exile. At times, we have
conveniently referenced ourselves as “Persians,” in an
attempt to disassociate ourselves from the angry, hos-

tile, and virulent face of the clerical regime in Tehran.
Today, the once respected citizen of Iran endures the

humiliating

experience of being fingerprinted

at

international borders, as if they were all criminals.

One of my goals for Iran is to continue what my

grandfather started—the restoration of pride in the

INTRODUCTION

11

words “Iran” and “Iranian.” As Iranians, we need not

be ashamed of our political past. A century ago, our
country

was

ranked

among

the undeveloped

and

backward nations. The Constitutional Revolution of
1906 brought us a democratic parliamentary system
in place of an absolute monarchy. Later, my grandfather was instrumental in preserving our territorial

integrity and in setting Iran on the path to modernity.
During his short tenure, he managed to lead and
transform

Iran from

a poor,

disease-ridden,

and

chaotic country into a secure, progressive nation.

At an early age, my father took responsibility of
an Iran occupied by foreign forces. Under his leadership, the country rid itself of the occupiers and, in a
relatively short time, transformed Iran into a unified,

prospering nation. Ironically, some have argued that
the crisis of the late seventies was due, in part, to an

excessively rapid rate of growth and modernization.
During the same period, unfortunately the democratic

process was curtailed and did not keep pace. This contributed greatly to the political crisis that preceded

the 1979 upheaval. Flying in the face of a previously

12

WINDS

modernizing

OF

CHANGE

Iran, the clerical regime ushered

in

extremism and militancy, thereby antagonizing the
world and miring our country in costly isolation.

Iran’s destiny will ultimately be determined by
its own citizens. Iranians are a gifted people with a
great civilization, yet they value modernity as they
do their ancient traditions. But time is running out,
and the process must start now. ©

This book focuses on several key areas. First, I
have presented my personal philosophy and attitudes
as I evaluate our past, our present, and the future.

Second, I have set forth my thoughts on the direction
my compatriots may wish to consider as we plan and

look toward a dynamic future. Finally, I have offered
solutions about how to break out of the present
impasse. Winds of change are sweeping through Iran.

The clerical regime is bracing itself for an irreversible
downward phase. Important days and events lie ahead.
We must handle the forthcoming transition wisely
and prudently if we are to avoid another plunge into
yet another dictatorship. How can we plan for this?
How can we ensure a smooth transition to democracy?

INTRODUCTION

13

What can we do as individuals and as a community to

bring about positive change?
The

answer

lies in a collective,

united

front,

working together in finding solutions to our problems. Let us therefore join hands and commit all our

efforts towards making such a future a reality.

,~

Aeeaye
+

a

s

nee
AS

ea

:

vse

ay

=

on

>

nests

i

weil Wiglp eet Ente, pebracoon~ i:
Compnyestetss nner
cian

‘ished Loe stoma seesaliieglaniaesl 9)
eae

uae seh

ater eos

=Sarir wpesein \) wits,

Bic

a

ia

a ge sa:

| YAR

Seis
Tart nee

FW Reo

Galant eat jawed serie i,

;

Ane: pieatsned « "i ee

pail lige

>) evileiescn: | he

secede, ih ae a

- Pee

oie

taal ase Capel Ti

= oe

Ait

Sap eed piecrumslo yes:

[

=e

a 2 ike

Ra

Sy

<s

Ss Geren)eatssiesta
evi nseplate jai

Sie

ee
on

CHAPTER

MY

VISION

AND

1

OUTLOOK

| hile my name is known to all Iranians,
f| 1 regret that my views are less well
known,

especially to Iranians in our

| homeland.

Because I believe that it is

critical that my thought process and core beliefs be
well understood by as many Iranians as possible, I

would like to offer here some basic principles that
underlie my thinking about the future of our country.
In a free, open, and democratic system, it is quite

natural that, if the people agree with, and embrace, the
views of a particular movement or leader, that move-

ment or leader may ultimately be provided the opportunity to implement those views. With this premise,
15

16

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

my ability to offer the symbolic leadership Iran needs
lies in the acceptance of my views by my compatriots.
The past twenty-two years have given me plenty

of opportunities to develop and refine my thinking

about the predicament of our country. My views have
resulted from my exposure to a multitude of opinions of friends as well as foes; I did not limit myself
to talking just to my supporters. One of the earliest

lessons life taught me was the critical importance of
seeking the truth. In the political scene, the full picture, and hence the truth, can only come from know-

ing alternative points of view. The strength of a good
leader comes from being exposed to diverse ideolo-

gies and opinions; decisions cannot be based solely
on the counsel of advisory groups, all cut from the
same cloth.

Ever since childhood, I have despised hollow flattery and blindly obedient yes-men. Today, my closest
advisors are aware that I demand truthful and factual

opinions. Of course, our traditional culture is filled
with elaborate courtesies and complex relationships.

But the false advice and selective reporting my father

MY

VISION

AND

OUTLOOK

lez,

received from some people was ultimately a betrayal,
not only of him, but, more importantly, of the people.
With this as a constant reminder, I regularly solicit

the viewpoint of as many people with different ideologies as possible.
On

the international

scene,

I benefited

from

interaction with world leaders, including monarchs,

presidents, prime ministers and party leaders, polit-

ical and scholastic figures, and prominent members

of the business community. I studied their experiences and methodologies, and exchanged ideas and

suggestions. This provided me with a great deal of

insight into the feasibility of a variety of social, economic and political models, which in turn led me to

conclude that, despite our unique circumstances, our

problems do have solutions. In fact, governments
around the globe face a multitude of similar problems,

and

address

them

by utilizing

solutions

derived from a variety of models and methods. All
this is done in an atmosphere of freedom and open

debate, and through the interaction of governments
with NGOs and academics, both domestically and

18

WINDS

internationally.

If the Iranian

OF

CHANGE

problem-solving

model is to be successful, our country must have a
similar atmosphere of openness.
This experience

has been a great crucible

in

which to hammer out my own political thinking and
philosophy over the years. I am optimistic because I

believe there are indeed ways out of our present
predicament. The cynicism and despair that afflict

many of our countrymen is the main symptom of our
closed and repressive environment.

They have no

opportunity to engage in open and public debate,
analyze the nature of a variety of problems, or question the legitimacy of the clerical regime as a whole.
In this context, I wish to present the principles

and values that form my vision in respect to Iran:
First, I believe

that self-determination

is the

essential centerpiece and key to nearly all our aspira-

tions. The absence of democracy has been one of our
greatest sources of weakness and vulnerability in the
past. What Iran lacks is not so much the concept of
democracy as the practical experience of working to
implement it. We are paying the price today.

MY

VISION

AND

OUTLOOK

19

Thus, attaining freedom for Iran is my number
one goal. Without it we have no foundation. That I
am the son of the last Shah of Iran is well known, but

it is not the issue. My only goal is to establish a secular democracy in Iran. Our countrymen have to be

liberated first. I am well aware that, at this point, any
discussion of a monarchy in Iran—or a republic for
that matter—would be divisive. And it would compromise the vital issue of unity at this critical period
in our history. The merits of the institution that I

represent can be weighed only after we actually have
a political order based on self-determination and genuine democracy. At this moment, Iranians must not

be distracted from placing the democratic process at

the top of the list of national priorities.
But why have we had problems in the past with
establishing a democratic leadership? The reasons

are many, but I think we need to start with the
national psyche of our country—a tendency to look

up to a sword-bearing man on horseback, or some
kind of “savior” in whom all faith can be placed. As
a student of our own history, I affirm that Iranians no

20

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

longer need to wait for the arrival of a “savior,” that
in fact, we, the people, are riding that horse, and our

will is our sword.
Iran has gone through tragic and dark times over

the past two decades, affecting every single one of us,
wherever we may be. But I trust we have learned
something from this experience. We cannot look to
some great leader to come in and give us solutions on
a platter, to bestow upon us a good life, ready-made.
We must start from scratch. Striving to make Iran a

great country is a patriotic duty and task for all of us.
We therefore have to make certain that we commit

our best efforts towards its realization. Responsibility
for choices, and their consequences, must rest with

the people. Thus I insist that democratization, above
all else, is the prerequisite for our success. The exact

form of democracy can be decided later through
national debate and referendum.
Second, we must look to the future and not to

the past. Many events have occurred over the past

half century, filling us all with diverse emotions.
Whatever we may think about the past, what was

MY

VISION

AND

OUTLOOK

21

good and what was not, we need to remember that
even the best of yesterday cannot address the needs
of today. Each era has its particular set of citcumstances and requirements.

We need to understand

them fully as we strive to build our future. We have
no time, nor should we have the desire, for ven-

geance. We all have grievances about various things,

but these that can mire us in the endless, ugly
process of settling old scores. Our country needs to

get on with the new agenda.
Third, we have to renew and strengthen our tra-

ditions and the practice of tolerance. Our country is a
rich mosaic of different religious, ethnic, and politi-

cal groups. No one group can be allowed to dominate, and everyone must feel at home in our shared

motherland. We have to recognize that the views and

aspirations among the population will differ to some
extent, and that we must accommodate these differences. It is time we reestablish our roots of social,

religious, and ethnic tolerance. This does not only

mean that we allow for the presence of those who
think differently, but that we recognize diversity

22

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

itself as the bedrock of democracy—that it guarantees a lively civil society.
Fourth, communication—a central tool affecting
virtually every aspect of our times—is

the critical

link to success. With this in mind, I believe in open
dialog and communication

with the disillusioned

within the current regime. Dialog and open com-

munication will not only serve as an important tool

to facilitate and enhance the pace of change, but
more importantly, it will avoid pushing the hardliners into a corner, whereby they could stifle the
small breathing space our courageous

youth have

been fighting for in their struggle to gain complete
freedom. In this respect, dialog does not suggest that
the shortcomings of the clerical regime are justified

or that the system should be legitimized.
Fifth, we require a healing process. It has taken
a whole generation for people to be able to view the
prerevolutionary era in a clear perspective. It will

take even longer before we fully understand

the

implications of a generation coming of age under

clerical rule. Already we are witnessing a change of

MY

VISION

AND

OUTLOOK

23

heart by many of the same people who actively
helped bring about the clerical regime. But even
more than their parents, the children of the revolution who consider themselves innocent victims are

well justified in claiming their right to determine
their own

results

future, and not remain stuck with the

brought

about

by the older generation.

Fortunately, emotions are being set aside, and people
are looking at the whole process more objectively.
In every corner of our country, Iranians openly question the clerical regime,

and seek solutions

that

would get our country back on track. If the original
intent was to seek more freedom, clearly we have
witnessed its opposite. The goal remains the same,

but innocence has been replaced by a political awareness. The past national frenzy was based far more on
emotions than on rational thinking. Reconciliation
is now essential.

Sixth, the principles of peaceful evolution, nonviolence, and reconciliation on the political level are

at the heart of my thinking. If Iran is to start operating as a genuine democracy, Iranians will need to

24

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

put aside their prejudices, phobias, paranoia, and
bitterness, and demonstrate their ability to maintain
unity in diversity.
Some Iranians tell me I am naive or excessively

idealistic when I term nonviolence a basic principle.

But I embrace
approach

nonviolence

to change.

as a tested, practical

Mahatma

Gandhi

and

Dr.

Martin Luther King, just to name two, succeeded

through nonviolence against great odds. But I also
recognize that nonviolence cannot work unless the
regime in question is entering a crisis stage, filled

with self-doubt, as I believe many ruling Iranian
clerics are doing. Signs show that pragmatic ele-

ments within this regime may be thinking about a
way out of the present impasse.
But how do we handle this process? The good
news is that the situation in Tehran, in broad terms,

seems

to be heading in the right direction. The

regime is losing confidence in itself. Even those high
up are aware of widespread dissatisfaction and anger
on the part of the population and do not want to

push for a replay of 1979. Many in the regime also

MY

VISION

AND

OUTLOOK

25

realize that mass coercion against the people is no

longer a good option.
While espousing nonviolence, however, we can-

not be naive. I do not believe for a minute that people should passively accept brutality and repression.
Indeed, should the regime sense imminent collapse,

and decide to hold onto power by raw force and
terror, the people have a legitimate right to defend

themselves.

Nor

would

the world

community

allow such genocidal activity. I hope the situation
will not come to that, and that the regime will rec-

ognize the inevitable and act accordingly. For the

desired scenario is not a bloody revolution, but a
peaceful evolution—the only process that will bring
about lasting change without uprooting all social
foundations.
In tactical terms, the clerics must be allowed a

workable exit. A peaceful transition will get the clerics out of the halls of government and back to their
respected positions in the mosques—not in a humiliating way, but in recognition of their own interests
and that of Islam.

26

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

Since the religious factor has been one of the most
important

issues consuming

our

society in recent

decades, I would like to elaborate further on the sub-

ject of religion and the role of the clergy in our society.
Many Westerners, unaware

of Iranian history, have

developed the impression that Islam has always been
central to our governing process, and that Iranians’

religious beliefs have barred them from espousing the
principles of separation of church (in this case, the
Shiite clerical structure) and state. Nothing can be further from the truth. In reality, Iran has experimented
for several centuries with various degrees and models

of governance, quite independent of religion.
However, a profound personal commitment

to

faith has been deeply rooted in Iranian culture and
heritage. As one of the cradles of civilization, Iran has
been a land of tolerance, a home to a multitude of eth-

nicities and religions. The respect for individual faith
gained root and flourished in our land, and our fore-

fathers were among the first to introduce the concept

of a deity and of monotheism to mankind. In all these
years, men of the cloth, regardless of which faith they
represented, were respected members of our society.

MY

VISION

AND

OUTLOOK

27

Since the advent of Islam, our clergymen have
served as a moral compass. Spirituality has been an

inseparable part of our culture. And our men of the
cloth have been respected by the various sectors of
our society.

But the advent of an Islamic theocracy in 1979
introduced a totally different role of religion and
clergy. For the first time, these revolutionary clerics
stepped out of the mosques and entered the political

arena. Rather than being moral advisers to society,
they became the decision makers and attempted to
manage the daily affairs of the country. Even worse,
they attempted to rewrite our history, our culture,

and our traditions.
Soon, the once

revered clergy had to provide

daily answers to the most difficult social, economic,

and policy questions. When their answers fell short,

so did reverence to them.
Today, moral guidance has been replaced by clerical censorship and dictatorial fiat. Daily, the ruling
clerics in Tehran pass judgments on which news-

papers should be allowed and which banned, what
type of clothing is appropriate and what is not, what

28

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

music will be allowed and what will not. The sad fact
is that clerical policies have generated a great deal of
animosity and resentment—an immense disservice to
our religious heritage.
The dramatic consequence of the Islamic revolution has been the realization that theocracy is an

unacceptable form of government. Iranians, among
them an increasing number of highly intellectual
and vocal clergymen, are openly debating the merits

of secularism—a clear separation of religion from
government.
This growing number of clerics and religious
intellectuals see no contradiction between modernity
and Islam. More importantly, progressive theologians do not see democracy as a direct threat to

religion. In fact, the debate in Iran over religion in
recent years has been among the most advanced and
thought provoking in the entire Muslim world. This

advanced thinking is the result of the obvious shortcomings of a religiously based government.
It is critically important, however, to clarify that

the rejection of theocracy—of an Islamic republic—

MY

VISION

AND

OUTLOOK

does not, in anyway,

v2)

mean

a rejection of Islam.

Equally important, separation of religion and state
does not only restrict the clergy from interfering in
government affairs, but the government from interfering in religion.

Like so many other Muslim countries, Iran faces
the dilemma of what to do about calls for Family
Law—for example, issues pertaining to divorce pro-

cedures and a women’s rights to inheritance—which

is exclusively based on the Shari‘a, the Islamic Law
based on the Quran and the Hadith. However, if
democracy—representative

government—is

the

order of the day, then these laws must be based on
popular will. That being the case, the Shari‘a may
have an influence over the language of such civil

laws, if so wished by the people. The specifics and
implementation of these principles should be left to
the

future

constitution,

which

will

need

to

be

drafted and approved by the people of Iran.
Thus I hope to see an end to theocracy, and the

separation of religion from government as being in

the best interest of Islam and democracy. As outlined

SiO)

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

above, it would present a unique opportunity for
those in the regime to exit politics peacefully.
Seventh, concerning the normalization of interna-

tional relations, I boldly favor—if certain preconditions are met

by the current

regime,

especially

concerning human rights, the media, and the libera-

tion of political prisoners—the

restitution of such

relations as soon as possible. This will remove unnec-

essary burdens on the people of Iran. In addition,
history clearly demonstrates that totalitarian systems
break down faster when there is dialog and openness.

The rulers can no longer hide behind walls of isolation,
unquestioned and unexamined. Democracy demands

that leaders be accountable to their people. This is
precisely why many hard-liners in Iran seek to block
normalization of diplomatic relations with the West.
Normalization and dialog are not just the concern
of governments,

but of the international

business

community as well. As part of this policy, interna-

tional businesses will naturally be at the forefront of
reengagement with Iran. However, such efforts must

be conducted with the long-term interests of the

MY

VISION

AND

OUTLOOK

31

Iranian people in mind: the pursuit of business inter-

est must not be at the expense of human interest.
Eighth, I call strongly for civic responsibility.
Today's problems require the active participation of
our people. In this respect, Iranians need to take much

more

responsibility than before. Traditionally, we

have had the tendency to rely overly on powerful leaders to make all the decisions and take all the initiatives. By the same token, we as a people have tended
to blame foreign influence and conspiracies for our
ills. In short, “victimization” at the hand of domestic

or foreign forces has been our favorite cultural lament.

How long are we going to blame our misfortunes
on others? When do we take responsibility ourselves?
Clearly, that cannot happen until people are given a
chance to take responsibility. When they are denied
it, they feel frustrated and never develop a civic sense.

The curse of our history is that the public has never
been able to participate in a politically meaningful
way in the system. As a result, we have often felt
either helpless or alienated.

That

mentality

prevalent in my father’s era and continues today.

was

32

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

Iran cannot forever claim that its backwardness

is due to the machinations of others to keep them
behind. We need to step up and demand a voice in
policymaking, offer ideas, corrections, and accept the
consequences. No person or system can afford people
happiness or success without personal responsibility.
Today, I sense that the era of conspiracy theory,

“victimization,” is being replaced by a new era of
modern thinking and self-realization. Our people
have awakened. They have paid a heavy price to learn
the merits of democracy. Our youth are, on a daily
basis, pushing the envelope in their quest for selfempowerment. My call for civic duty is embedded in

my profound desire to ensure that the old psyche be
forever abandoned and replaced by a new sense of
national pride in self-determination and rule.

My final point involves the controversial issue of

the impact

of Western

culture

on

Iranian

life.

Indeed, this topic has been at the center of a heated
debate in our country in recent decades. It is controversial because, despite the many positives the West

has to offer, there are negatives as well. Among its

MY

VISION

AND

OUTLOOK

33

greatest contributions are the principles of democ-

racy, individual liberty, and human rights, which are

compatible

with

all cultures

However,

differing

values

held

and

civilizations.

by Eastern

and

Western cultures continue to fuel a debate about
which aspects to choose and which to leave behind.

Japan is one of the better examples of how Eastern
societies can embrace the best of the West while preserving their own value systems.
Similarly, with a heritage that spans millennia,

Iran is perfectly capable of preserving its cultural
identity and value system while choosing the best of

Western ideals. Interestingly, it is often forgotten
that the best of Western

ideals, such as human

rights, pluralism, tolerance, and inclusion of ethnic
and religious minorities, are deeply rooted in our

culture.
Since its emergence,

demands

and in order to suppress

for political liberalization,

the clerical

regime has mislabeled the debate, asking the people
to choose between “West-toxication” and national/
cultural independence.

34

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

It is one thing to advocate a rejection of foreign
interference

in our country’s domestic

affairs: no

patriotic Iranian could argue with that. The issue,
however, is not compromising our cultural identity:

it is the mechanism by which we can attain real modernization,

both politically and economically.

We

need not become in the least “West-toxicated”

in

order to succeed. In other words, modernization need

not automatically mean Westernization. Clearly, we
can build our own Iranian experience with a fotward-

looking attitude and modern thought, and without
alienating the rest of the world in the process.

IRAN

AT THE

CHAPTER 2
CROSSROADS

| he clerical regime of the Islamic republic is now deep in crisis and sliding into
d decline, and will ultimately reach an

impasse. It won’t do just to reshuffle a
cabinet and reform a few policies. The transformation

must be basic and profound: the abandonment of
an undemocratic system in favor of a genuine, allinclusive, and representative government.
As secular forces attempt to gain ground, they
face escalating resistance, violence, and spillage of

blood. Newspapers are indiscriminately shut down,
journalists imprisoned, reformers intimidated, critics

silenced, students beaten and tortured, and opposition
35

36

WINDS

figures murdered.

OF

CHANGE

Daily, we read about riots and

protests across the country. Economic chaos reigns:

while many remain unemployed, those who do have

jobs need to work several of them just to make ends
meet. Unable to secure meaningful employment and

affordable housing, our youth, together with their
parents, are weary of revolutionary slogans and des-

perate for real solutions. In short, political frustration
and economic malaise have cast a dark shadow over

the prospects of recovery, imperiling the future of an
innocent generation.

Failures have also impacted our foreign policy.
Iran’s categorization and treatment as a rogue state is
yet another source of national humiliation. The revo-

lution has talked at great length about independence

from foreign influences, but in reality Iran has never
in its modern history been so vulnerable to pressures
from foreign governments as it is today.
Tragically, the most damaging blow to our coun-

try’s main faith was struck at the hands of a regime
that professed the virtues of an Islamic system, but
failed to realize them by politicizing Islam. Not only

IRAN

AT

THE

CROSSROADS

ShV/

have they made the nation and themselves vulnerable,
but they also have ruined whatever respect people
might have for politics and religion. Many Iranians
today lay the blame on the clergy and on religion

itself. The once respected and revered cleric is now the
most despised individual in our society. Time and

again, I have heard the frustration of the majority of

our traditional clerics—those who from the beginning rejected the concept of a theocratic state—who

lament the discrediting of our religious values, their

loss of credibility, and the sanctity of their establishment.

Even some of the revolutionary clerics have

voiced similar concerns in their private conversations

with me.
The political system as a whole has lost credibility and legitimacy. The ruling clerics are well aware

of the crisis: the resentment of the population and
the limitations of their own power. The regime faces
rising popular pressures. People are fed up, and the

Islamic republic can no longer hide behind such
excuses as threats from abroad. There is no longer a

valid defense to justify our country’s inability to

38

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

regain its once decent and improving standard of living. Iran’s dilemma is not just about dress codes; it
is about decent employment

and housing, higher

medical and educational standards, and reduction of

the gap between the haves and the have-nots.

In

short, our story is about basic decency and respect for
human life.
President Khatami’s surprising election victory in
1997 was a critical turning point in the history of the

Islamic republic, representing the first real dramatic
break with the system. But the people did not so

much vote for him as for a symbol, a split within the
establishment,

and for a faction seemingly

more

amenable to basic reform and liberalization. Although
Mr. Khatami’s

achievements

during his first term

were only token at best, his reelection to office—with
a relatively lower margin of public support—was

spurred by widespread public fear that any alternative
would make life even more miserable.

Previously, in 1993, the people did not actively
participate in the election of Khatami’s predecessor,
Hashemi

Rafsanjani. They were cynical about the

IRAN

AT

THE

CROSSROADS

39

merits of their involvement in the electoral process.

It was assumed that the regime would field its candidate,

irrespective

of the

national

sentiment.

However, in 1997 and again in 2001, they found the
opportunity to take matters into their own hands,
the opportunity

to send a strong message

to the

regime, as well as the whole world, that they would

no longer be passive, and that they would take a

clear step in curtailing the regime’s attempt to block
reforms. Hence, Khatami’s election was in essence a

vote of no confidence of the establishment, however

limited in choice as being the lesser of the evils.
The 1997 election was a step in the right direction. Khatami was clearly more liberal than earlier

leaders, and brought more popular voices into what

had been a totally closed system. But his changes
were only meant to improve the system of clerical
rule cosmetically,

not revamp

the entire clerical

order. Irrespective of his personal qualities, however,
Khatami failed to fulfill a single campaign promise
in his first four years in office. Not once, not twice,

but three times he gained a majority vote during the

40

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

presidential, municipal and parliamentary elections.
Yet

he

lamented

constitutional

limitations,

and

when the students’ movement as well as other crises

occurred, he actually sided with the supreme leader
and the ruling establishment at the expense of his

principal constituency. Today, after a fourth round of
elections ushering in Khatami’s second term, people
are still waiting for the materialization of his aging

promises,

although

most

of his constituency

has

basically lost faith in his abilities to deliver.
The reality is that Mr. Khatami’s ultimate goal
has always been to preserve the system, not to change

it. In fact, any other vetted candidate,
screened and filtered through

carefully

this closed system,

would be charged with the same task.
Alas, this system has proven to be unsalvageable,
and inherently irreformable. It is fatally rigid in its
interpretation of religion and legislation. Decision

making never reaches the level of the people and
their wishes, but instead remains in the clutches of

narrow-minded clerics and pedantic theologians who

articulate the ideology of the ruling establishment to

IRAN

AT

THE

CROSSROADS

41

secure their own positions of dominance and material gain.

Hence, deeply entrenched institutions still oppose
steps

towards

liberalization

and

reform.

governmental

revolutionary

foundations

Quasi-

like the

“Bonyads” in reality end up representing the private
interests of key regime supporters who have profited

immensely from their privileged position between the
state and the market, stifling free market forces and
entrepreneurship. The court systems, intelligence services, and organs of control and repression are all in the
hands of the hard-liners—even the state media. If you

were to take the religious aspect out of the equation,
you would find the rulers in Tehran to be little different from a communist regime in which every move is

fixed to perpetuate and insure its own survival. The
hard-liners have sought to silence any independent
voices anywhere within the media, but their monopoly

of control has been challenged by independent journalists who are waging a courageous struggle in the

name of a free press and honest examination of the
weaknesses of the regime.

42

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

Fortunately, the more the regime seeks to reform
itself, the more it will be forced to turn to the ranks

of competent technocrats. In fact, these technocrats
represent the greatest hope for change and progress

in the future. But today their hands are tied. Everchanging regulations coupled with rampant corruption prevent competent

civil servants from doing

their jobs: meeting goals, finding solutions, and

resolving problems.
Today everyone’s life is touched at the most basic
level by the stifling policies of this regime and by
the prospects

of democratic

reform.

More

than

twenty-two years of theocratic rule and economic

chaos have prompted Iranians to demand nothing
short of a secular democracy. Indeed, no generation
in our history has been as politically aware as today’s.
They don’t have all the answers, but the thinking
process is very important. Few, if any, young minds

take anything for granted anymore, unlike my generation. By and large, we had material comforts,

access to good education, and rising living stan-

dards. We were respected worldwide, and enjoyed

IRAN

AT

THE

CROSSROADS

43

normal and profitable international relations that
helped keep our enemies at bay.
This generation, however, is different. It has suf-

fered enormously and has had to pay dearly through
war, political suppression, loss of economic opportunity, and loss of respect from the international community. They are well aware that there is a different

world out there, and realize that things need not be
the way they are. Today’s youth openly question the

inadequacies of their government. Dissatisfaction has

forced the new generation to think much more politically and to take charge of their fate. They have indeed
become more responsible citizens.

This is the greatest asset that any reform movement can hope for when moving towards democratization.

In Czechoslovakia,

it was

the intellectuals

under Vaclav Havel who called for change. In Poland,

it was the blue-collar unionists under Lech Walesa

who led the change. In East Germany, the collapse and

abandonment of the security forces, the Stasi, brought
down the system. Today, the Iranian environment is

ripe for a combination of all such elements to work, all

44

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

because of the new psyche of the new generation—the
emerging “Third Force,” with secularism as the cor-

nerstone of its democratic aspirations.
It is important to recognize that people rarely

rebel out of misery. It is when things look like they
could be improved that people start pushing for
change. External reasons can have a course-changing

impact as well. The tragic September 11, 2001, ter-

rorist attack on U.S. soil was indeed a rude awaken-

ing, but one which has clearly changed the face of
the earth in terms of how the world has come to a
point of addressing, not just terrorism, but the ulti-

mate reasons that cause such behavior in the first

place. Had it not been for a sustained track record of
promotion of extremism and hostility, Tehran would

have been looked upon in a different light. Today’s
pressure on regimes such as the clerical one in Iran is
yet another element that is forcing the leadership to
retreat, thereby giving Iranians one more reason to

search for an opportunity to make a move.

Today, the limited degree of liberalization being
conceded by Tehran is just such an opening. However,

IRAN

AT THE

CROSSROADS

45

it is clearly not enough. The process of democratization
is not a one-way street, and a government cannot sim-

ply graciously grant it to its people. Democratization

is not given but taken by individuals who demand it.
It is a process, and one that mandates the full partici-

pation of each citizen. After all, it is the people who
must—and eventually will—determine how and what

it is that they demand from their government.

CHAPTER

3

OIL, ENERGY,
AND THE ECONOMY
4 | he politics of Iran—the nature of the
| clerical

regime,

its radicalism,

the

anachronistic nature of its theocracy,

|

and

hit the headlines.

its internal
What

policies—regularly

gets overlooked

is the

immense importance of Iran as an economic power

and key player in the development of the economy of
the region. Furthermore, with the largest regional

population and one of the oldest civilizations of
the world, Iran has a vast potential and a great

responsibility to maintain peace and stability in the
Middle East. Consequently any disturbance and dis-

ruption in the proper use of Iran’s resources will
47

48

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

likely have detrimental consequences for the region

and beyond.
At this moment in history, the question preoccupying all Iranians is our country’s future. Having

one of the youngest populations in the world, how
can Iran maximize its natural and human resources
in order to meet the aspirations of its 67 million plus

people—70 percent of whom are under the age of
thirty?

During 1999 and 2000, many Iranians broke the
barriers of fear and censorship by openly voicing their

anger at the continued lack of freedom and repression, and their disappointment at the failure of the
government of President Khatami to fulfill many of
its campaign promises. From the point of view of the
average citizen, it is the regime’s economic failures

that bite hardest and create its greatest vulnerability.
Unemployment, gross depreciation of the Rial (Iran’s

currency), inflation, and a stagnant economy are but
a few of the regime’s mounting problems.

Before the clerics took control of our country, the
National Iranian Oil Company produced over 6 mil-

OIL,

ENERGY,

AND

THE

ECONOMY

49

lion barrels of oil per day (mbd). Twenty-two years
later, Iran is hard pressed

to produce

half that

amount, while the population has practically dou-

bled. Similar to other sectors of the Iranian economy,
the oil and gas industry has been politicized. Hence,
negligence and unabated corruption, coupled with

lack of proper management and foresight, have contributed to a dramatic decline of our mother industry.
Moreover,
level,

to keep production

according

to

the

at the current

government,

Iran

needs

immediately to put into place an annual long-term

investment package of $3 to $4 billion in order to
maintain

existing

facilities,

plus an

additional

annual investment package of $2 to $4 billion to
increase production levels. Many Iranian oil experts

say that the immediate need for investment in the oil
and gas industry is much higher than these official

figures—amounting to a minimum of $100 billion
over the next decade. Since this regime has failed
to demonstrate

its ability to utilize its resources

effectively, the only alternative is to attract foreign
technology and investment. But what frustrates this

50

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

scenario is the existence of constitutional restrictions

and antagonistic laws opposing foreign investment,
thereby hampering its flow into our energy sector.
According to Iran’s current laws, foreign partici-

pation and investment in the exploration and devel-

opment of both onshore oil fields and offshore projects
are carried out under an adverse system called “buy
back,” which clearly compromises our national interest. These laws have greatly damaged the industry

because of their restrictive nature, limiting investment by big and medium size foreign oil companies.
By contrast, our neighbor, the Republic of Azerbaijan,
since gaining its independence in 1991, and with less

than one-tenth of Iran’s population—has obtained
investment commitments in excess of $50 billion in
its energy sector, while Iran has barely managed one-

tenth of that amount.
Here it is interesting to note that under the
Islamic regime of the past twenty-two years, Iran’s

total oil revenues of over $300 billion have been
more than twice the cumulative oil revenue of the

country since the early days of William Knox D’Arcy

OIL,

ENERGY,

(1901),

when

AND

THE

oil was

ECONOMY

first discovered

Dil

in Iran. In

addition, the new regime had inherited billions of
dollars as international monetary reserves. But due
to gross mismanagement,

this regime squandered

both its inherited reserves and the highest oil revenue in two decades in our national history, leaving
the nation with infrastructural and industrial decay.

Further compounding the problem is the use of
outdated technology in the development of oil fields.
This not only increases production time, but also damages existing reservoirs. Most experts agree that there

are at least forty newly discovered onshore oil fields
that have not yet been exploited, and exploration with
old methods and the lack of modern gas-injection

technology has “killed” a great number of oil wells.
Clearly, Iran remains one of the most important

oil and gas producers of the twenty-first century.
Currently Iran has an estimated 10 percent of the

world’s oil reserves as well as about 18 percent of the
world’s gas reserves.

But for such a potential to

materialize,

of dollars

billions

of investment

are

required. Our problem is not money. It is the nature

52

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

of this theocratic regime, and its pursuit of inefficient economic

and industrial policies, that have

held back the process of modernization.
result

is that

badly

needed

foreign

The net

technology,

know-how, and investment have not found their way
to Iran’s key industries.
The hard reality is that Iran’s population is projected to hit the 100 million mark within the first

half of the twenty-first century. The regime has
guaranteed a crisis because it has failed to attract the

type of investments necessary to generate sufficient
revenues to address the most basic needs of its booming population.

Obviously Iran is going to have to depend on its

energy resources to serve as the backbone of its economy for quite some time to come. The challenge will

be to manage the oil industry as our supplies of oil

gradually come to an end. A high proportion of our
present GNP is tied to the maintenance of the existing and dated oil infrastructure. A visionary, sound,

and responsive government in Iran should plan for the
postpetrodollar era. Here again, myopia has clouded

OIL,

ENERGY,

AND

THE

ECONOMY

53

the clerical regime’s foresight. Its fundamental rigidity has disallowed any move towards progress.
However, Iranians should be comforted by the
fact that our country also enjoys extensive reserves of
natural gas, the second largest in the world. Here we
have

a great

potential

for a vast

new

industry,

thereby extending the window of productivity in our
energy sector.
Additionally, with the emergence of petroleum

industries within the newly independent states bordering the Caspian Sea, as well as Central Asian
states, the strategic role of Iran has been enhanced in
the area of energy transport. Geographically, Iran is
a natural region of energy transit at lower cost than

most other options, such as the Caucasus mountain
ranges or the long distances across Turkey and even

Afghanistan. Iran stands to earn additional income

as a result of significant transit fees. But since the
industrial world depends on these lines, Iran must be

politically stable, and must guarantee security for
such transit. Only Iran can provide access to the
warm waters of the Persian Gulf as the shortest and

54

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

most cost-effective way for these Central Asian and
Caspian states to export their energy.

Despite our substantial gas deposits, it is unwise

for any economy to rely exclusively on a single product. We need to aim at other areas such as mineral

exploration, especially copper. We should seriously

consider alternative sources of energy for our domestic
consumption. This will enable us to preserve our valu-

able petroleum resources—on the one hand, applying

their usage to more efficient and profitable pharmaceutical and petrochemical

industries,

and, on the

other, reducing the harmful environmental impact of
polluting emissions.
Iran’s strategic access to Central Asia and the

Persian

Gulf reinforces

our geo-economic

advan-

tages, which compels us to give priority to the

expansion of our light industries. Products such as
detergents, household appliances, light machinery,

clothing, and textiles have a proven demand in our
neighboring

emerging

markets.

Similar

factors

should prompt us to boost our economic expansion

in the area of high technology and electronics. Here

OIL,

ENERGY,

AND

THE

ECONOMY

5S

again foreign investment and transfer of technology
are essential if we are to excel in this field.
Infrastructure has been neglected far too long. In
order to address the basic needs of our society, as well
as keep pace with our anticipated growth, we must

aggressively pursue the expansion and moderniza-

tion of our transportation and communication infrastructures. Primary and secondary highway systems

and roads, bridges, and high-speed railway systems
are among the most important areas needing imme-

diate attention.
In recent years, decaying radar systems, outdated

navigational ground facilities, and the slow process

of phasing out old planes have caused great concern
over the safety of air travel in Iran. The once proud
Iranian civil aviation industry needs to be quickly

revamped. Failure to address this issue will not only
place our own citizens at risk, but it will also exclude

Iran as a viable strategic hub for international aviation and commerce.
In general, Iran still remains a very attractive

field for foreign investment.

But we need much

56

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

more infrastructure as well as well-trained cadres in

order to satisfy the requirement of our growing pop-

ulation. In addition to the aforementioned needs in
the areas of communications

and transportation,

additional housing and various new educational and
medical facilities must be given high priority.
At this point we lag significantly behind international standards in the area of technological skills.
With the drastic decline in the quality of education

in our universities and training centers, and a lack of
sufficient and well-trained educators and instructors,

Iranians can only feel frustrated. Our young generation, which promises to be the most important factor
to fulfill our various development and modernization
goals, bears the brunt of this lack. Annually, about

1.5 million anxious high school students compete for

about 85,000 places in Iranian universities. That’s a
ratio of almost 18 to 1. At the time of this writing,

there is only one job for every twenty-three graduates. In other words, over 90 percent of the best
minds remain unemployed or will not find a job
befitting their academic achievement and expertise.

OIL,

ENERGY,

AND

THE

ECONOMY

57

Developing our own technological skills will also

help free us from the traditional trap of foreign technical dependency. Much of the money spent on foreign
experts should go to develop our own educational base.
Iran, similar to many developing countries around the
globe, would not want to waste national income on
supporting high foreign salaries. The generation of a

domestic, highly skilled training force will help us
steer clear from such dependency down the road.

What Iran lacks is not a hard working labor or
white-collar force; it is the state of our economy that

has made it very difficult for people to find decent
jobs. With dismal salaries and insurmountable problems associated with a depreciating currency, on the
one hand, and dramatic increase in prices for goods or
housing, on the other, our population has been impov-

erished—nearly 50 percent living under the poverty
line. The rate of unemployment is simply unaccept-

able by any standard. In short, while our national
income, both in real as well as nominal terms, has

fallen substantially below what it used to be before the
revolution, our population has since doubled.

Sys!

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

The bottom line is that the current political situ-

ation in Iran is at the core of the problem. Realistic
policies, as well as significant and tangible changes in
our national and economic

priorities, have yet to

materialize. Despite numerous promises made by the
current

government,

nothing

has really changed.

Vows of reform and liberalization have proved but
empty slogans. While the major preoccupation of the

ruling clerics has been to shuffle faces in an attempt
to dupe the outside world into seeing “moderation”
and “normalization,”

Iranians themselves

have lost

faith in this regime’s ability to make a breakthrough.
As demonstrated in the demands articulated by

the frustrated youth of our country, the need for polit-

ical reform and liberalization is the cornerstone of our
people’s aspirations. Any improvement in our socio-

economic

situation

can

only be brought

about

through democratic change—a change that can only
occur in a postclerical and posttheocratic era. Here
again, outside the regime’s core group, theologians see
no conflict between religion and modernity. However,
they openly concur that theocratic rule is in direct

OIL,

ENERGY,

AND

THE

ECONOMY

2)

_ conflict with democracy, and inimical to religion and
the clergy as well. Once more, the conclusion points to
separation of religion and government as the key pre-

requisite, and the only remedy to our national illness.
Despite the current

state of affairs in Iran, I

remain highly optimistic about the economic

and

political future of our country. We already have a dedicated work force, as well as sufficient resources. What

we need is a major change in domestic politics, as well
as in our international relations.

A government truly

of the people can and will bring us back into the
world—it will empower our gifted and young citi-

zenry to apply themselves fully to building our future
prosperity.

:
>

=f

Li

7 fal

.

a

7

i

;i.

4

7

;

nS

}

be

’

:

“

oe

:

aes Si

3=

i
;

Vet
‘

na
=

7

7
xt

‘

VA
.?
&

he
wm) y

¥

ertyiy

70 ‘

4

;

CO
RE
gE
Ih
a
r

"

:

’
‘Wee

es
nat 5

etn:

a8

gala”

My

”

I
~—

a

7

¥
,

75

ae
ome

¢

q

;

©”)
54
ad,

he

WO, S

if a>

.

. ' a We

:

i
a ay a

are

Th

ale

'

ERE
iy IO
.

:

8

ee4OT
Pinkh+ Si
Prfin

Lae

R

PP Ae

an

2

;
ioe

CHAPTER 4
POREIGN*PORICY

or nearly two centuries, external influence

and, at times, intervention

has

| played a central role in the way Iran
| has viewed and positioned its foreign
policy. Our struggles to preserve and protect our

sovereignty and territorial integrity have molded the
Iranian psyche, while the country pursued its relationships with other countries.
Iranians are proud of having successfully resisted

multiple attempts by covetous foreign powers to colonize or control our country. Our nation is vividly
aware of its history, which has included invasions,

wars, and frequent manipulations of our domestic
61

62

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

affairs by external forces. To this day, our minds are
heavily influenced by such experiences.
Today, Iranians expect a foreign policy that stands
firmly for Iranian rights and national interests. Our
people also recognize, however, the realities of an inter-

dependent world, which requires of its community of
nations civility and cooperation as opposed to radicalism and hostility. Hopefully we are now at a stage in
Iranian history where we can achieve some balance in

viewing the international order—cherishing our inde-

pendence and self-determination

while seeking to

work constructively with the world community.
As Iran enters the new millennium, it finds itself

in a region filled with potential flashpoints. To our

north, the Caspian basin offers our region newly
found opportunities with significant new oil and gas
reserves. This clearly translates to long-term regional
economic exchanges and cooperation, with Iran as a
central and strategic link between Central Asia, the

Caspian basin, and the Near East.
Yet the same region is rich with hotspots that may

unleash disruptions. We are currently witnessing a

FOREIGN

POLICY

63

state of unresolved
Armenia

conflict and friction between

and Azerbaijan, with which we are geo-

graphically,

historically,

Throughout

history,

and

culturally

Iranian-Azaris

and

linked.
Iranian-

Armenians peacefully coexisted within our border. In
view of this cultural link, a credible, democratic, and

stable Iran would have a natural role as an honest broker in resolving this and other similar crises. In the

post-Soviet era, it would be mutually beneficial to resurrect

the multifaceted

bonds

that have

existed

between Iran and its northern neighbors for centuries.
To our northwest, Turkey offers an important
bridge to Europe. Our relationship has historically
been based on mutual respect and a thriving trade.
Turkey’s experience with secularism has long been an

interesting
debate.

regional model

In view

of current

providing

intellectual

circumstances,

it is

unquestionably a core issue at the forefront of most
political arguments challenging the current clerical

regime. In recent years, by contrast, elements of mis-

trust have been sown by Tehran’s desire to promote
internal unrest and ideological exports. Apart from

64

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

neighborliness, the fact that nearly a quarter of Iran’s
population is composed of Azaris and other Turkishspeaking citizens makes it even more imperative for
Iran to reclaim the warm state of relations our two

nations have historically enjoyed.
To our west, Iraq, with whom

enced

long-term

border

important cornerstone

we have experi-

conflicts,

remains

an

for regional security. Iran’s

devastating eight-year war with Iraq came at a great

cost. It will be a long time before Iranians can put
behind them the cold statistics of more than half a

million dead, more

than a million crippled and

maimed, and several million displaced. Beyond the
human toll, it will take decades and cost billions of
dollars to rebuild destroyed cities, villages, homes,
schools,

hospitals,

industries,

and

historic

land-

marks. The greatest tragedy, however, is that the
Iran-Iraq catastrophe was a conflict of personalities

and individual ambitions, driven by unadulterated
egotism. The Iraqi people have paid as dearly as their
Iranian counterparts. Our futures are inevitably tied
and

must

be based

on

a shared

commitment

to

FOREIGN

POLICY

65

mutual respect and regional stability. The democra-

tization of both nations will undoubtedly contribute
to a stable and reliable relationship.
To our east, Afghanistan and Pakistan are two
countries with which we have historically enjoyed

friendly relationships. However, at the time of this
writing, Afghanistan is experiencing a tragic tur-

moil under the harsh and radical policies of the

Taliban,

further exacerbated

by their association

with Osama Bin Laden and his organization’s recent
terrorist attack against America. The Afghans, similar to their Iranian brethren, are witnessing the sup-

pression of their deeply rooted cultural values, as

well as their aspirations for modernity. One of the
most

outrageous

and tragic consequences

of the

Taliban regime has been the brutal repression of
women in Afghanistan—a heartbreaking issue well
understood by their Iranian counterparts who are
still experiencing the agonies associated with their
treatment as second-class citizens.

Pakistan’s nuclear arms program undoubtedly
has a direct impact upon Iran and the immediate

66

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

region. Our neighbor’s long-term stability and security is the only guarantee of the containment of the

proliferation

issue. Since its birth, Pakistan

has

enjoyed a relationship with Iran based on mutual

respect and common values. As a friendly neighbor,
Iran can

be an important

regional

and

partner

socioeconomic

in promoting

cooperation,

which

would contribute to Pakistan’s long-term stability.
Highlights

of recent

decades

underscore

the

global strategic value of the Persian Gulf. It not only
serves as the energy lifeline to the industrial world,

but it also is the umbilical cord nurturing the very
prosperity of its surrounding states. Despite recent
cosmetic warming of relations, ever since its incep-

tion, the clerical regime of Tehran has targeted its
southern

neighbors

with

its radical

ideological

exports. If Iran is to contribute towards.a peaceful and
stable region, our relations with our Arab neighbors
must be based on genuine friendship, cooperation,
and mutual trust.

Beyond our immediate region, Iran is as interdependent with the world community as any other

FOREIGN

POLICY

67

country. The xenophobia imbedded in the mentality
of a handful of radical theocrats should not be confused with the thinking of our open-minded citizens.
As Iranians, we are not unique in having a strong

sense of nationalism, pride, and desire to maintain
our cultural identity. But given our deep desire for

modernity

and

advancement,

we

must

embrace

global interaction, which brings with it knowledge,
technology, and overall progress.
Iran’s current foreign policy, which has been set

in the background of militant anti-Americanism, has

a clear record of pursuing a mix of “revolutionary fervor” with anti-Western

hostility. This policy has

resulted from a need to establish a legitimacy, which
is far from secure at home. However, as is evident in

the recent cosmetic niceties emanating from certain

elements of the regime, Iran can no longer afford to
isolate itself from the very same quarters it must rely

upon for future financial investments and technological know-how. Hence, contrary to earlier lines pursued by its propaganda machine, the Islamic regime
has tried to counterbalance its continuing hostility

68

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

towards

the U.S. by offering major dubious

and

opaque

concessions, clearly in conflict with Iran’s

national interest, to other Western powers as well as
countries like Russia, China, and North Korea.

In our look towards the future, we must focus on

two fundamental

issues: our partnership with the

global community, and our need and desire for selfdetermination and cultural preservation. Contrary to
the dogma underlying this regime’s foreign policy,
global partnership, self-determination, and cultural
preservation are not incompatible.

CHAPTER

THE

IRANIAN

5

DIASPORA

| tragic consequence of the Iranian revo-

lution of 1979 is that we have today
| over three million Iranian expatriates
scattered all around the globe. With the

United States and Canada playing host to more than a
million, another third live in Europe, while the rest

are scattered from Latin America to the Far East and

Oceania. The departure of hundreds of thousands of

skilled professionals from Iran has been a stunning
loss. Writers,

poets,

singers, physicians,

scientists,

engineers, officers, lawyers, diplomats, academics, and

many other experts had, reluctantly, to bid farewell to
their motherland

for fear of persecution and even
69

YE)

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

death. Sadly, even after more than twenty-two years,

this exodus continues. Last year alone, according to

official government records, 220,000 of Iran’s best
minds

left the country,

most

probably

never

to

return. The loss of such human talent, which would

have otherwise been in the service of our country, is
simply beyond calculation.
Empty promises, coupled with continued repres-

sion at home, have left people with an obvious sense
of neglect, frustration, and outrage at the overall liv-

ing and human conditions in Iran. Apart from a
limited group of cronies with a vested interest in
keeping this regime in power, the clerical regime

has failed to bring the rest of the nation together
in order to apply its multitude

of talents.

The

regime has also failed to persuade the expatriate
community—in

which are some

of.our brightest

minds—to return to our homeland and participate
in the advancement of our country.

After two decades of stressful readjustment, by
and large most Iranian expatriates have managed to

establish themselves

within their respective host

THE

IRANIAN

DIASPORA

wa

countries, often very successfully. But few of them
can ever fully forget that they live far from their
mother country, deprived of their identity. To be
unable to live freely in one’s homeland, and to enjoy
its landscapes, scents, tastes, dialects, and wonderful

traditions, is a heart-wrenching tragedy for all of us,
especially those who have had to endure this painful

separation for over two decades.
The first task of a future democratic government
in Iran would be to attend to the immediate needs

and priorities of the people, such as jobs, housing,
health, and education. But that government must

also plan for the repatriation of many members of the
diaspora, as well as implement various programs that
would

engage

the expatriate community

in con-

tributing in a variety of ways to their home country’s

progress. The Iranian diaspora is a great hidden asset
for the future of our homeland. Many of its members

are by now well established in their new homes and
societies and integrated into the political, economic,

and social life of their adopted countries. With a new
generation of Iranians coming of age outside of their

Tie

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

land of origin, they have for the better part prospered in all walks of life and assumed leadership
roles in various sectors—starting

businesses,

ning for public office, administering

run-

hospitals,

banks, research facilities, and scientific entities at

the highest levels, becoming law enforcement officers and civil servants, and joining the ranks of
highly respected scientists, researchers, and artists.
Only a sound and reliable political system will
lure such gifted patriots to return and enhance the

future of Iran. A visionary government committed to
our future generations will have to awaken national-

istic fervor and inspire our diaspora to commit their
resources

to the service of their homeland.

This

human, intellectual, and financial capital must be
mobilized

in order

to complement

the existing

resources within our borders. Together, these dedi-

cated Iranians will have an opportunity to maximize

their potential and impact our future.
Our

countrymen

in the homeland,

of course,

represent the vast majority of our national human

assets. They are directly involved in daily political

THE

IRANIAN

DIASPORA

73

life inside Iran, yet they also face the powerful
restrictions, even dangers, from the rigid political
order

imposed

by the clerical

regime.

Iranians

abroad, on the other hand, have full political freedom to speak and act, but by definition are absent
from daily political life in Iran. They are excluded

from direct participation in its political order and
therefore have limited influence. This reality calls for

complementing roles—a division of tasks—between
the two groups, in which each has something unique
to offer the other.
In all this, it is indeed tragic to witness Iran’s

loss of the constructive contribution of at least two
generations of expatriates that could have helped

propel our country into the twenty-first century.

There is no doubt in my mind that if Iran had not
undergone

a revolution

but instead had evolved

peacefully, by now it could have been economically
on a par with many of the so-called “Asian Tiger”

countries. Unfortunately, a regime with a medieval
mentality sidetracked the efforts of the previous generations, forcing the people to cope with repression,

74

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

poverty, and unemployment at home, as well as exile
and asylum abroad.
After the traumatic experience of the revolution

and its consequences, we cannot undo overnight all
the changes that have taken place, nor should we. It

would be naive, even arrogant, to think that those

who have been living abroad for two decades or
more, or who have grown up abroad, can just go

back as if nothing had ever happened. And those
that stayed in Iran have their own

concerns

and

anxieties. We need to be sensitive to the fact that
there might be some potential resentment

part of those who

stayed behind

towards

on the

those

returning. However, our compatriots at home should

look at the positive aspects of the repatriation of new
talent and information, as well as some degree of
Iranian wealth from overseas that will move back
into the country. All this should be welcomed as an

additional asset for Iran.
Conversely, I would expect my compatriots abroad

not to forget that it is those who did not leave who
have had to bear the most severe hardships. They are

THE

IRANIAN

DIASPORA

The)

the ones who have been struggling within the system

for over two decades and who have pushed to bring

about as much progress as possible in spite of the
hard-line clerics.
There

may

be particular

resentment

towards

some of those who chose to leave on purely economic
grounds. But their lives outside the country have not

necessarily been rosy either. They have often under-

gone various kinds of malaise, depression, suffering,
loneliness,

now

discrimination,

and

displacement,

and

look forward to returning. People who had

served in the high echelons of their former society
have had to take much humbler positions abroad and
lose the recognition and prestige they once had. For
many

others,

religious

minorities

for example,

departure was almost a necessity because of a real

threat to life and property. Others faced nearly certain persecution on a political or ideological basis.
In the end, the desire of various Iranians to return

to the homeland demonstrates some basic love and
commitment to their country. I hope we can all deal
with this sensitive question that involves feelings

76

WINDS

that are understandable

OF

CHANGE

on both sides. Indeed,

in

view of our overriding national agenda, we must
strive to overcome

such emotional hurdles in the

shortest time possible. Both groups of people have
unique skills and, in the end, depend on each other.

Countries that learn to attract and harness their
intelligentsia

from

the very

start

have

the best

chance of developing functioning democracies and
successful societies. The terrible thing about dictatorship is that it shuts out constructive criticism, the

voices of those who see better ways of doing things.
These dictatorial regimes pay the price for decades
by being deprived of the best ideas their intelligentsia can provide. With our talented diaspora on
the outside, and the cadre of professionals on the

inside, and of course the unswerving dedication of
every single Iranian, we have more than enough to
trigger a dynamic explosion of intellectual and economic energy as well as greatly improve our chances

of establishing a successful and thriving democracy.

CHAPTER

6

CONSTITUTIONAL
MONARCHY

‘| or over twenty-five centuries of recorded history, the institution of monarchy has been one of the main pillars
| of the Iranian nation. However,

the

passage of time has brought about new concepts and
ideas, including those about governance. I see the
potential role of the monarchy today as significantly

different from what it has ever been before in the history of our country.
As an important factor contributing to historical
continuity, the monarchy has, throughout the millen-

nia, provided the Persian Empire with stability and
preserved, for the most part, our nation’s territorial
77

78

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

integrity. But a twenty-first-century monarchy must

be inherently different from those of the past and can
only be perpetuated by remaining strictly constitu-

tional and operating within the framework of a truly
democratic

society. In other words,

the monarch

would be a symbol for the nation, but in fact not
responsible in any shape or form for the affairs of

government.
Having

said that, I firmly believe that self-

determination and popular sovereignty continue to be
the overwhelming

and long-standing desire of our

people, and a vital priority upon which our whole
future depends. While many argue that the immediate problems in Iran are economic and social, the roots
of these ills lie in the political nature of the current

regime. As we witnessed in the final days of the former
Soviet Union, the final salvation came as a result of a

change in the system as a whole and not just some

liberalization of its policies. In other words, the problem was not necessarily due to the leadership of a
Stalin, Brezhnev,

or Gorbachev;

the problem

was

ultimately systemic, and the system itself had to go.

CONSTITUTIONAL

MONARCHY

79

Likewise, the problem in Iran has nothing to do
with the personalities of the current leaders. Regardless of what one might think of Mr. Khatami and the
authenticity of his discourse, he is just as much crippled by his own system as Gorbachev was at the end.

The Islamic republic as a system is bound to collapse
as it reaches an unavoidable

impasse. One cannot

reform what is inherently immutable. Therefore, Iran’s

only salvation lies in our ability to promote freedom,
and we must grant top priority, in the context of our

national

identity and

cultural

preferences,

to the

installation and implementation of a completely democratic system as rapidly and smoothly as possible.

There are currently two possible models of democratic governments in the world—a constitutional
monarchy, and a democratic republic. As heir to the

Iranian throne, I am regularly asked about my views
on the role of a monarchy in a modern Iran and its

compatibility with democracy. I will reiterate some
key points here:
First, a constitutional monarchy is as compatible

with democratic order as a republican form of govern-

80

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

ment. Today we can find good examples of each model
in prosperous, free, and independent states such as
Spain, Sweden, France, Germany, Japan, Norway, the
United States, Canada, and several others.
Second,

under

a constitutional

monarchy,

the

head of government is clearly the elected prime minister, not the monarch. The first misconception of
most proponents of a republican system for Iran is
their assumption that the monarch would both reign
and govern. A second misconception is that because
the monarch inherits the position and is not subject
to an electoral process, the people have no choice in

leadership, and therefore democracy is compromised.
Again, to counter such a claim, I would argue that it
is the prime minister—comparable

to an elected

president in a republican system—who is in charge

of policies

and

decision

making,

and

not

the

monarch, who is a symbol of unity and stability for
the nation, but not a figure responsible for the governing process.

The best way for a monarch to serve the country

is to be the guarantor of the constitutional process

CONSTITUTIONAL

MONARCHY

81

and to protect the constitution itself. This would
certainly be the case in Iran. He or she must be

immune to vulnerability and criticism by remaining

detached from the day-to-day running of government,

which

would

be the responsibility of an

elected prime minister.
The monarch must be above all political factions

and be neutral, unbiased and impartial vis-a-vis all
ideological, ethnic, religious, or other social and political groups. Only then could the monarch be a true

unifier of the country, the cement bonding a multiethnic nation and heterogeneous society. With such
ultimate legitimacy, long-term stability is further
guaranteed. It is also important to note that the spe-

cial grooming and training of the heir to the throne

since birth brings him or her a unique qualification for
this honorable task. Beyond intellectual faculties, the
heir to the throne has the privileged opportunity to

develop personal appreciations for different countries
and their cultures as well as cultivating relationships

with a variety of political, cultural, and academic
personalities worldwide. Such an experience can only

82

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

benefit the nation without the monarch having to be

directly involved in government.
The key resemblance

between a constitutional

monarchy and a democratic republic is the fact that
the person who is in charge of government is indeed
elected by the people. For example, in Great Britain,
the prime minister is elected in a national election.
Such is the case in Canada, in Holland or in Belgium.

In the United States, Germany or France, a president
is elected. However, in a republican system, we find

some variations. Some countries have a nongoverning

president as head of state with an elected prime min-=
ister as head of government, such as India or Israel.
Some countries have only the president as commander
in chief and head of the executive, such as in the

United States or South Korea. In some republics, we

see both a president and a prime minister in charge of
government—sometimes

from a different political

party—such as in France.

Notwithstanding such variables, in all of these
countries the person in charge is an elected official.
In the case of the monarchic systems—whether it be,

CONSTITUTIONAL

MONARCHY

83

say, Queen Elizabeth, King Juan Carlos, King Carl
Gustav, or Queen Beatrix—none

of them

is held

accountable for the affairs of their respective governments. As heads of state, they represent their nations,
while no one questions the democratic nature of the

governments of those countries. So when I speak of a
constitutional monarchy as an alternative or option

for Iran, I would point to these examples as probable
models.

Third, even though as the heir to the throne I
represent

the institution,

I do not consider

my

immediate role to be that of an advocate of monar-

chy itself. Rather, I see my current role to be that of
an advocate of the needed democratic and peaceful

process of change in Iran today. If the people of Iran
are to choose a constitutional monarchy or a repub-

lic by means of a national referendum (a decision
that would determine my own future), we must first

set the stage for such a decision process to become a
reality. It is in this context that I find, at this crucial

time, any debate between the merits of one system
versus the other to be premature and divisive, and

84

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

something that could only delay the progress of a
much needed change in Iran.

I would never want to be a cause of polarity and
division. Quite the contrary, my role is to be a catalyst

and a provider of unity. Therefore, I stress the fact that
all of this is not about me, but the cause of freedom for
Iran and Iranians. Furthermore, while Iranians have

different persuasions, and therefore view my role from
different perspectives—monarchists

as their king,

republicans as a political figure—I have never allowed
such a diversity of opinion to cloud the overall concept

of our collective need for unity by promoting democracy in Iran as a national priority and as our common

denominator.

Fourth, out of the more than 67 million people of
Iran, I find myself in a unique position as the only per-

son with the historical burden of representing the
institution, albeit today as a potential option. So long
as the Iranian people, in a genuine referendum, have

not decided the fate of this institution, I have the duty

to represent it to the best of my ability. For those who
would argue that such a referendum did take place in

CONSTITUTIONAL

MONARCHY

85

1979, I would suggest that that process was certainly
not free and fair by any stretch of the imagination. In

addition, it should be pointed out that nearly threequarters of today’s population had no voice in that
decision. Having said that, the true voice and opinion

of Iranians today, who are certainly unable to express
their real aspirations under the current regime, should

be given the opportunity either to confirm their
acceptance of the current system, or determine the

regime and political structure of their choice in the
future. Again, it is on these grounds that I believe
that, well before we discuss and debate the merits of a

republic or a monarchy, we must first have an open
political environment.
Furthermore,

what matters

at this time is the

content of the future regime. The fundamental issue
for Iranians is to attain self-determination through
the democratic system, thus guaranteeing the repre-

sentation of candidates from all political parties in
the electoral process. Regardless of the ultimate form

of regime, the future governments of Iran will be
formed as a result of a genuine democratic process.

86

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

Fifth, I personally believe in the advantages of a
constitutional monarchy over a republic for Iran at
this time in our history. If I didn’t, I would not have
accepted my duties as heir to the throne twenty-one
years ago. Part of my reasoning has a lot to do with

the nature of Iran itself as well as our Iranian culture
and mentality. For example, if we were to look at the

United States in comparison to Iran, we could ask
ourselves this question: Would an American living

in Buffalo feel closer in terms of cultural identity—
not to mention tribal, ethnic or religious in the case

of Iran—with a Canadian living in Toronto, or with
a fellow American living in El Paso? I suppose the

answer would be the person in El Paso. On the other

hand, if you asked a Sunni Baluchi living in the
southeastern part of Iran whether he felt culturally
closer to a Shi'a Azerbaijani living in northwestern

Iran close to Turkey or Iraq, or to a Pakistani Baluchi

living a few miles across the border, the answer
would be the latter.
So, while

national

unity

in America

is not

directly related to the role of an individual in the

CONSTITUTIONAL

MONARCHY

Sh7/

system, in Iran the monarchic institution has in fact
been the key element in preserving national unity.
Taking into account Iran’s rich cultural and ethnic
diversity, as well as migrating tribes and nomads,

one could understand how Iranians have valued their

symbol of unity throughout the centuries. The same
weight and importance is given to the merits of this
institution in Iran today, perhaps even more than

before the revolution.
The possible disintegration of Iran is a legitimate
concern, and not an insignificant threat in the long
run, should the current trend of affairs remain un-

altered. This is one area where a symbol of unity
could make the difference. On another plane, given
the fragile nature of a newly established democracy,
the very same symbol of unity could maintain stabil-

ity and unity during the period of institutionalization of various components of the overall system, as

well as the growing civil society. In recent years, the
best example was King Juan Carlos of Spain’s crucial

role in lending stability to the post-Franco era, when
a young Spanish democracy was seriously threatened

88

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

by a potential right-wing military coup against the
socialist government. This is further testimony to the
fact that, for a constitutional monarch, it makes no

difference which political persuasion is represented in

government.
As far as I am concerned, it will be just the same

to me if our future prime minister is a representative
of a conservative party or a socialist one. It goes

without saying that any Iranian who qualifies for the
job should have an opportunity to participate in government,

regardless of his or her religion, ethnic

background, or other personal or social orientations.
This is the future I envisage for Iran, and if called
upon by my compatriots to serve as their monarch, I

would vehemently defend these principles in accordance with my duties to preserve our people’s rights

and protections against any kind of discrimination as
articulated in our future constitution.

Having said that, Iranians may still opt for a
republic. They may have reached a point where they

no longer feel that they need a monarch as a symbol
to preserve our national unity, among other reasons.

An intimate moment between
father and son: watching
sports on television.

Standing in line before
entering a classroom.

Taking notes in class.

A typical
family dinner.

Praying at the
tomb of
“Imam Reza”
in Mashad.

msi veaeerene, | Reading news

etitessaseesssegee | reports in
Panama.

winter outing in Farah Abad, Tehran, on
my horse “Palang.”

Getting ready fora training flight in an F5
in Tehran.

In my soccer uniform during
my pilot training days at
Reese Air Force Base.

Addressing compatriots in a packed
sports arena in Los Angeles.

A daring candlelight vigil in Tehran following the sinister September a
terrorist attack on the United States.

os in Los Ar geles.

With my brother, Ali Reza,
at our mother’s home.

SSS
sch

seseneraeege

My father: | took this photo in
Cuernavaca, Mexico.

With my daughters, Iman and Noor,

-

Leila, my late sister, whose u
has deeply affected me

With my wife, Yasmine, in early 1990s.

wos ih egyptfas
.e-

lran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.

pale
$Sa

Young students protesting against the
regime’s attempts to quash freedom of
speech and freedom of the press.

pal
SSa

Supreme leader
Ali Knamenei and President
Mohammad Khatami,
below a poster of
Ayatollah Khomeini.

palel
SSa

rocks at riot police in Tehran.
a

P=

oa
Oo
is}
3=a
a=
AB

A

CONSTITUTIONAL

MONARCHY

89

This issue is not limited to Iran. As a matter of fact,

recently two countries, Sweden and Australia, have
exercised such an option in referendums on whether

they should keep their monarchical system or switch

to a republican system, albeit for different reasons.
Evidently, the majority in both countries decided
that the status quo was fine.
The bottom line is that Iranians should have a

choice—one that ought to be made in a free and
untainted environment. Like all people around the
world, Iranians have the inalienable right to decide

their own future. In a sense, this will bring closure to
a dark period in Iran’s history and simultaneously
open the nation to a new and bright era. I would consider my mission accomplished the day Iranians go
to the polls to make their decision. Frankly, I am not

at this time concerned about what will happen to me.
If called upon to assume my royal duties, it would be

the greatest honor bestowed on any individual. If not,
in terms of my personal convictions, I see it as my

civic duty to discharge my responsibilities to my
homeland and state, albeit as a simple citizen.

90

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

Sixth, it is important that Iranians look beyond
me as the messenger and understand the message
itself. Fortunately, many of my compatriots today
have risen to the occasion and appreciate the need, at
this critical juncture in our evolving history, to pro-

mote unity among groups and organizations of different political and ideological persuasions, and a

consensus at the national level to commit all their

resources to the restoration of self-determination.
In the past twenty-one years, I have relentlessly
played my part by advocating the need for cooperation and unity among all those who agree with this
principle. In order to facilitate the process, I have

worked closely with many of my compatriots on
strengthening

and

expanding

this arena,

both

among opposition groups in exile, as well as various

leaders and organizations at home. As access to Iran
becomes easier, we are hard pressed to establish more
and more contacts within Iran—particularly with
the new generation and the intelligentsia.
We should, as a nation, have faith in the process
and trust each other’s sincere commitment

to our

common goal. So long as we all respect the rules of

CONSTITUTIONAL

MONARCHY

91

the game—the democratic process—we should also

respect the outcome. It is in this light that I would

like to set an example and be the first to respect the
choice made by the majority of Iranians. Because I

firmly believe in the foresight and political wisdom
of my fellow compatriots in making the best choice
in an environment free of persecution, intimidation,

and despotism, I invite all to have faith in this dem-

ocratic process. If we believe that the future constitution will guarantee each person’s rights under the

law of the land—tregardless of whether one belongs
to the majority or minority—we should have no fear

of the outcome.
Finally, at this crucial time in our country’s history, it is important for my compatriots to under-

stand fully this major and perhaps most important

point: I consider my role to be that of encouraging a
transitional,

nonviolent

process

of change

while

advocating no specific outcome—except the restora-

tion of self-determination. I invite all Iranians to
participate in this process, and for all of us to set the
appropriate

political

environment

determine our political future.

and

stage

to

a

.

the ad

th

Wats Tate eas & y

fe

7

a

ion

ee)

oy

=

~

»

»

(tt ee
a
i.

q
a

’

*

is

.

ab,

?

ie.

we
<r

\
;

i

Serie

:

+

i.
8
’

aoe

:

ew
a

pathas

rei ean

=g

oy

Oia sti bhi)
os

j

oe

ne

es
=

ra

na

a's

CHAPTER

NONVIOLENCE
CTvVil

7

AND

DrSseope erence

| ne of my fundamental

beliefs with

| regard to our

struggle for

| freedom

national

in Iran has been nonviolent

_] action and civil disobedience against
the clerical rulers.

I am fully aware, however, that

many of my compatriots may seriously doubt the
likelihood of political change in Iran without violent
confrontation and bloodshed, particularly in view of
the regime’s record of ruthless repression, assassination, and tyranny.

Nevertheless, as a student of history, I base my
convictions on the power of the people and their

ability to do what

it takes through sheer will,
93

94

WINDS

determination,

organization,

OF

CHANGE

and planning.

Most

recently, we have witnessed a dramatic unfolding of
events leading to the deposition of a feisty Slobodan
Milosevic in Yugoslavia. Even more dramatic was

the way the old Soviet Empire simply crumbled
without bloodshed, a violent coup, or even assassinations. Indonesia, South Africa, and Chile are other

examples where the mighty could not hide behind
brute force and repression against nonviolent actions
and the resistance of the masses.

:

As far as Iranians are concerned,

we need not

look far to find counterexamples of such phenomena:
i.e., Iran’s own 1979 political upheaval and the violence that the Islamic regime has since inflicted on

Iranians.

Two

decades

later, our nation is being

crushed by the iron grip of one of the most brutal
regimes it has ever seen. While the world is in search

of twenty-first-century solutions for peaceful coexistence

and

socioeconomic

progress,

Iran’s

clerical

regime is obsessed by its struggle to command and
control the will and desires of a nation.

History has provided us with two fundamental
lessons: The first is that political change as a conse-

NONVIOLENCE

AND

CIVIL

DISOBEDIENCE

S15)

quence of violence—be it a classic military coup, an
assassination,

or civil war—more

often

than

not

results in the replacement of an undesirable political
situation with one even worse. Nonviolent action for

change is based on the fundamental principle that
the means will determine and influence the end. In

this respect, if our national objective is to attain freedom, democracy, and long-term political and social

stability, the means to achieve such a goal must be as

worthy as the goal itself.
The second lesson has been learned in recent
decades, during which the world has witnessed dra-

matic political change in numerous countries ruled
by unpopular and undemocratic regimes. In nearly
all cases, such changes were brought about as a result

of important and effective nonviolent movements,

which included well-organized and well-publicized
civil disobedience campaigns. In my view, the important lesson is not merely that unpopular regimes will

inevitably fall, but that no matter how brutal or ironclad, they will eventually succumb to popular will.
Moreover, we have learned that when the popular will

is expressed through nonviolent resistance and civil

96

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

disobedience, it generally results in the establishment
of a democratic political system.

Examples of Nonviolent Campaigns
Organized mass struggle and nonviolence have a long
history and involve the refusal to counter the violence
of a repressive system with similar means or methods.

A dramatic and often emulated technique of nonvio-

lent resistance and defiance was Gandhi's bold, yet
peaceful, campaign for India’s independence frem the
British

Empire.

There

are,

however,

many

other

examples, concerning both domestic problems and
foreign interventions.
American revolutionaries staged tax and tea boy-

cotts against the British. Two centuries later, the
U.S. civil rights movement

called for nonviolent

resistance and actions such as sit-ins, freedom rides,

voter registration drives, jail-ins, and the like. The

1960s witnessed

opponents

of the Vietnam

War

employing tactics such as draft card burnings, mass
demonstrations, and tax resistance. Since the mid-

seventies,

nonviolent

civil disobedience

has taken

NONVIOLENCE

AND

CIVIL

DISOBEDIENCE

97

place at dozens of nuclear weapons research installations, storage areas, missile silos, and corporate and
government offices, in opposition to the arms race.

The anti-apartheid movement of the eighties staged

daily protests in front of the South African Embassy
in Washington, D.C., joined often by members of
the U.S.

Congress,

as well as religious

leaders,

celebrities, and students.

By no means is civil disobedience and nonviolent

action a modern phenomenon. As early as 494 B.c.,
plebeians in Rome decided not to kill the consuls
who refused to answer their grievances but instead
withdrew from the city to a hill, which became
known as the “Sacred Mount.” After a few days, significant improvements to their lives were granted.

The people of the Netherlands

nonviolently

resisted Spanish rule in the 1560s, and Hungarians
resisted Austrian domination in the 1850s.

Jewish lives were saved in Denmark and Norway
when those nations used nonviolent methods during

the Second World War to stop the “Nazification” of
their school systems.

oT s}

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

During the 1960s and 1970s, the Salvadoran
people’s version of nonviolence included occupations

and sit-ins at universities, government offices, and
factories by student groups and labor unions.
Berlin witnessed, in 1920, the defeat by nonviolent action of a rightist coup d’état against a legitimate
German government. A similar situation occurred in

the Ruhr in 1923. In 1986 the people of the Philippines peacefully overthrew Ferdinand Marcos. In the

spring of 1989, the world was stunned when hundreds

of thousands of Chinese demonstrated and fasted for
freedom of speech and democratic reforms. Tiananmen
Square was filled with thousands of Chinese students
holding signs reading “We Shall Overcome.”

And today, in Iran, the students and youth are
leading a national

charge for secular democracy

through a multitude of nonviolent methods of civil
disobedience. Sit-ins, silent marches, street protests,

newsletter/pamphleteering, and calls for boycotts by
student leaders and organizations have inspired similar acts of protest, strikes, and in some cases even
riots by discontented workers, farmers, and parents,

as well as members of the oil and gas industry.

NONVIOLENCE

AND

CIVIL

DISOBEDIENCE

99

Only a few years ago, Iranians dared not speak
out against the ruling clerics, but today they are
openly voicing their anger and boldly defying the
regime in cities, towns, and villages throughout Iran.

This is a lucid example of how nonviolent action
and pressure exerted by the people can result in

reform. Iranians need to keep pressing ahead until
they can attain a secular government, a civil society,

and a real democracy based on the will of the people.
What Does Nonviolent Action and
Civil Disobedience Mean?
My conviction that nonviolent action is an effective

method for bringing political change in Iran is based
on the fact that it ultimately yields comprehensive

and permanent results. Although some may assume
that “nonviolence” implies passivity, it is in reality a

potent and active form of resistance. That is because
nonviolent civil disobedience involves people—en

masse—taking

active roles, making

being collectively committed

choices, and

to a clear course of

action. Often, such movements are based on particular principles. In the case of Iran, it is based on the

100

WINDS

principles of secularism,

OF

CHANGE

liberal democracy,

and a

civil society.

Desperation and a lack of self-confidence may
indeed engender hate and a wish for revenge in peo-

ple’s hearts and minds. I regularly find these emotions

and hear cries for help from my suffering compatriots.
Because of a false sense of helplessness, they often
demand nothing short of a swift, forceful, and unforgiving “iron fist” to destroy the enemy overnight, thus
clearing the path to freedom. They would easily con-

done violence for the sake of salvation.
But any change based on political violence only

results in partial rectification of the original problem.
Especially, since acts of political violence are often

directed at the command of a limited number of people, such acts are rarely inclusive and do not facilitate

a broad participation by the masses, thereby failing to
translate into a necessary precondition for achieving a

stable and permanent democracy.
My

philosophy

is not

based

on

seeing

our

national struggle as a “rescue mission” alone, but as

one that will plant the seeds of permanent political

NONVIOLENCE

AND

CIVIL

DISOBEDIENCE

101

stability and the institutionalization of democratic
principles and a civil society.
The strength of a nonviolent movement based on

civil disobedience is that it is based on mass support.
It encompasses all sectors of society, and it is all-

inclusive in nature. Ultimately, it can even provide
those on the other side with a way to submit peace-

fully to the will of the people.
It is imperative that Iranians today look beyond

revenge or calls for blind violence, and discard myths
that suggest we are not yet ready to take collective

charge of our destiny.

The Road Ahead
In our national crusade for personal and political
freedom, we must remain committed

to our ideals

and avoid acting like, and thereby becoming like,
our oppressors.
I must insist on this point more than ever. If his-

tory has taught us anything, it is that repeating
mistakes dooms us to relive the same tragic conse-

quences. I do not believe in choosing a path that will

102

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

give us only a temporary respite. I adhere to the
school of thought

that aims to eradicate a basic

problem permanently, no matter the cost and the
duration of the process. In other words, it is not
enough just to ease the pain; we must identify and
permanently cure the disease.

Only through a profound evolution in our collective psyche, cultural awareness, and intellect can

we as a nation attain the sort of modernity and political liberty suited to the twenty-first century and
beyond. We must embrace our cherished principles
of nationalism,

patriotism,

independence,

sover-

eignty, and cultural identity, but also graduate to the
next level—trebuilding our society by taking charge
of our own destiny. No mysterious hand, no miracle,

no savior can hand this to us on a silver platter.

What we must never lose sight of—and what
will ultimately decide our national fate—is our com-

mitment to fashion our destiny by implementing our
ideals and by putting these thoughts into action. We

must work for it and earn it—together!

CHAPTER

THe

NEV

8

TPABLE

IMPLOSION

| he Islamic republic of Iran, as a politi“| cal system,

|

has reached

an impasse.

More than twenty-two years after its

aru inception, it has shown neither the
ability nor willingness to implement meaningful economic reforms or political liberalization. Although it
has been given the benefit of the doubt by a morethan-patient society, this clerical regime simply can-

not continue to sustain itself in power and faces

inevitable implosion. Rifts and divisions among dif-

ferent factions of the regime have become even more
apparent in recent years, and the internal disintegra-

tion will only escalate. An incompetent and corrupt
103

104

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

theocracy is not what the people intended to attain
with the revolution, and all eyes are now

turned

towards the opportunity to attain a better political
future. But the way in which the regime will collapse

is of critical importance, because it will profoundly
affect the nature of any future government.
Prerequisites for Change

First, the internal situation in Iran has to be ripe for
change. True, a harsh and determined authoritarian
regime is not easily removed—as we have witnessed

in the case of certain military dictatorships or totalitarian communist regimes. But the situation in Iran

has evolved, and the prospects for positive change are

greater. The fragmentation within the ruling establishment has increased and widened the gap between
rival factions.
Ever since the Ayatollah Khomeini’s death, a
clerical clique has ruled Iran. But even that clique
has been smart enough to recognize that it does not

have the people’s backing for most of its policies.
They too lived through the revolution twenty-two

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

105

years ago and are well aware of the danger of serious

public disorder—even anarchy—if the heavy public
pressure

for change

is consistently

ignored

or

crushed. As a result, we now have a society ripe for
fundamental change.
Unlike the outside world that still believes moderation within the Islamic regime is possible, Iranians
have come to the conclusion that the ruling theocracy

is inherently incapable of liberalization. Even if the
ruling clergy were to recognize the need for fundamental change, the biggest stumbling block remains

the constitution of the Islamic republic itself. For
instance, while everyone was hoping that Khatami

would indeed be able to implement his campaign
promises—a position that earned him an overwhelming vote, especially among youth and women—he

could not in fact act upon it, simply because he
would have had to violate the letter of the law. It is
important to realize that the constitution ultimately
is based on divine law and that the supreme leader, or
“Vali-e-Faqih,” in this case Ayatollah Khamenei, has
full discretion to interpret the law as he sees fit, and

106

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

can override or veto any legislation. In short, the leg-

islative body, and for that matter the head of the exec-

utive, represents nothing more than a mockery of
what they claim to be a democratic system.

The people’s frustrations and desires, especially
among the intellectual elite and youth, are boiling

over into fierce public debate in the press, even though
the regime has tried to silence as many writers and
newspapers as it could. Even some of the initial members of the reform movement, who earlier advocated

some legal reforms within the context of the current

constitution, are now questioning the feasibility of any
such reform. The basic conclusion now reached by
many, including the students and some of Khatami’s

supporters, is that only a secular government can effectively implement true reform and establish a genuine
democratic system. As I noted earlier, everything rides

on the successful separation of religion from the state.
Some members of the ruling clergy admit that
they will be swept away if the regime fails to demonstrate a serious commitment to change, even though

they still believe in some modified religious govern-

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

107

ment. Meanwhile, the silenced traditional clergy has
maintained from the beginning that direct rule by
the clerics will in fact damage the clerical establish-

ment, and with it religion itself. Such a forecast is
vividly demonstrated in Iran today, after twenty-two

years of theocratic rule. I therefore believe that, for
the first time in over two decades, we have a prom-

ising setting for bringing about major change. With
cate and national determination, the secular move-

ment will culminate in a genuine democracy beyond
the current regime.
As another precondition, the movement requires
organizations both inside and outside the country

that will reinforce each other in order to facilitate the
process of change. Change

is not going to come

about simply because people want it, or because the
clerics decide to extricate or vote themselves out of

power. The clerics will never voluntarily give up
power and grant democracy. Only under popular

demand and unswerving pressure can they be forced
to relinquish power and yield to the people. There-

fore, the role of the democratic opposition, both at

108

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

home and abroad, is essentially to serve as a conduit

for popular feelings and aspirations.
But having organizations in the opposition is not
enough in itself. The various opposition elements,

especially those abroad, have to work together more

effectively. Those at home, who have been mostly
organizing themselves as underground groups, face

the important task of joining hands at some point in

the name of a collective effort. Only such an organized
“coalition” of forces at the national scale will allow
Iranians to go on the offensive and direct the process
of change, and practically dictate terms to the regime,
on their way to securing a new political future.

The primary task for political activists abroad, in
my opinion, is generally twofold: first, the rallying

of support from the Iranian expatriate community—
both in terms of intellectual and financial contributions—for our compatriots at home and especially

for the flag bearers of our struggle, namely, our students and various groups within our intelligentsia;
second, to direct towards the international commu-

nity a well-orchestrated

information

campaign

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

109

aimed at raising public awareness and sensitivity to
the realities of Iran.
As we witnessed in the case of South Africa or

Yugoslavia, overwhelming public demand was capable
of pressuring democratic governments, in particular,

to adjust their foreign policies by steering away from

business-as-usual approaches and towards support of a
democratic

process

of change.

Likewise,

Iranians

would greatly benefit from knowing that, after more
than two decades of practical neglect, this time the

world was truly rallying to their support. The people
of Iran would receive a clear signal indicating that
those governments will not favor the continued rule of

the current establishment in Iran for the sake of preserving certain economic

interests. Rather, true to

their stated principles and in defense of human rights
and freedom, they would no longer tolerate any actions
by the current regime in violation of such principles.
Iranians demand nothing more and nothing less than
what was done in the case of other oppressed nations.

Meanwhile, it is just as crucial to remember the
importance of unity among

the various opposition

iO

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

groups for the sake of our national cause. Any digression into premature ideological debates or insistence
upon personal political agendas will irreparably harm
the liberalization movement. As mentioned before, the

Opportunity to advocate one’s ideas and policies will
certainly arise, as long as we remain focused on bring-

ing about a favorable climate and appropriate circumstances for a genuine referendum and free elections.
Despite the importance

of such international

attitudes, I am still concerned that differing percep-

tions compounded by short-term interests between
Washington and Europe have made it difficult for
the West to arrive at a consensus on how to handle

the situation in Iran. For other power blocs such as
Russia and China, their policies towards the region
have changed little since the end of the Cold War,
fostering similar reactions as in the past towards

Europe and especially the United States.

Propelled by the pursuit of commercial gains and
the infamous “oil factor,” many states have unfortunately shown a callous disregard for the welfare of our
people and the state of human rights in Iran. Despite

THE

INEVITABLE

several

successive

Republican

and

IMPLOSION

111

administrations—both

Democratic

White

under

a

House—it

appears that the U.S. government has not been able

to move

beyond a self-imposed foreign policy of

“dual containment” and economic sanctions.

Although some diplomatic overtures were made
in the waning days of the Clinton administration,

the futile quest for “moderates” within the regime as
a whole has thus far forced a deadlock on any major
shift in policy towards an eventual normalization of

relations with Tehran. Even worse would be the pursuit of a different, but still detrimental, attitude of

opting for an “appeasement” policy.

Economic Sanctions

The quest for political change by Iran’s population
and the prospect of new

U.S. policies under the

George W. Bush administration make this the most
propitious moment

for U.S.-Iranian relations since

the advent of the clerical regime.
The genuine struggle taking shape in Iran today

pits the forces of state despotism against an emerging

112

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

popular movement that rejects Islamic fundamental-

ism, repudiates the “supreme rule” of Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei, and views the newly “reelected” Khatami

as an already spent political force.
The young emerging third force fully recognizes
that Khatami’s brand of theocracy and extreme militancy are inseparable, just as theocracy and democracy are incompatible. These youths already know

that the Western leaders’ belief that Khatami will
prove to be a genuine reformer in his second term is
a vain hope. More

importantly,

they know

the

Western policies that reward Khatami in anticipation
of such reforms fly in the face of twenty-two years of
clerical rule in Iran, and of dictatorship in general.
Under the guise of religious piety, Khatami and
Iran’s other theocrats have fostered political repression, economic decay, and moral corruption. They
have turned Iran into a pariah state while denying
the Iranian people their basic rights, and have driven

nearly half of the population into poverty—through
“elections” in which the regime vets and chooses

candidates. It resulted in a supreme rule devoid of

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

11s

every tenet of modern justice and civil governance,

in state-sponsored terrorism, in the pursuit of dualuse technologies and weapons of mass destruction,
and in the overall mismanagement of the economy
due to nepotism, graft, and the plundering of our

natural resources.
The U.S. administration and Congress are right to
condemn

these pillars of the clerical regime’s rule.

Now, however, the time is right to spread the focus of

Western policy to Iran’s internal development. This is

in part because change will almost inevitably come
from within Iran. Washington and its allies should
offer political and moral support to the Iranian people.
They should foster democratic development through
indirect assistance to the emerging movement against
the regime. Through the new opportunities presented

by the Internet and other technologies, they should

promote the dissemination of unbiased information to
give Iran’s young people hope and a tangible means to
turn their democratic aspirations into reality.

At the same

time, any viable policy by the

United States and its allies to promote a democratic

114

WINDS

Iran must

OF

CHANGE

include a responsible sanctions policy

vis-a-vis the regime. In my view, efforts to lift sanctions unconditionally are misguided. Any relaxation

should be linked to meaningful improvements

in

Iran’s human rights record, such as the release of
political prisoners or lifting the bans on a free press
and political parties.
If such improvements occur, however, the United
States may want

to consider, inter alia, extending

export credits for agricultural and medical sales to
nongovernmental entities in Iran, permitting the sale

of personal computers and software to the Iranian
people, and permitting the sale of civil aircraft and
maintenance parts so that Iranians can avoid the hor-

rors of flying unreliable, Soviet-built aircraft.
Among the strongest agitators for reduced sanctions are the U.S. energy companies. Unfortunately,

Iran’s oil supplies constitute not only an economic

boon, but also a political lifeline for the current
regime. In this area, it is imperative that sanctions

not be relaxed and foreign firms not be allowed to do
business in any way that strengthens the regime and

thereby facilitates its repression of the Iranian people.

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

iTS

In a democratic Iran, where the rule of law and

financial transparency will prevail, Western compa-

nies will be able to explore, develop, and transport
Iran’s vast oil and natural gas reserves fairly and competitively, and not on the backs of ordinary Iranians.
The rewards of U.S. leadership on this issue are
clear. It is vital that Iran, the most populous and
arguably most strategically significant country in the
Middle East, become democratic. A free Iran will find

common

ground with the West on political issues

in and beyond the region, play a constructive role in
international organizations, offer a moderating role

in the Arab-Israeli peace process, furnish a reliable
corridor for the flow of Caspian oil and gas resources
to international markets, and bring stability to the
Persian Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz—a strategic

route for the transport of two-thirds of the world’s
energy supplies.

The Opposition Abroad
It would be crucial at this stage for the foreign-based
opposition to facilitate the means, and provide various

channels,

of communications

for interested

116

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

governments and international political, as well as
nonpolitical,

entities

to

work

in tandem

with

domestic opposition organizations. Additionally, the
role of the international media, as exemplified in liberalization processes around the globe, is crucial. For

this reason, Iranians at home would be best served by
an all-out effort by the vocal expatriate community
to divulge as much accurate and detailed informa-

tion as possible about what is actually occurring
daily in Iran. This could very well force. Tehran
to permit the fledgling democratization process to

continue. Events are moving in the right direction
now. Iranians outside the country are catching their

second wind, greatly encouraged by the activities of
their compatriots on the home front.
It has been a source of concern that, while our

young generation at home has been undergoing a

political awakening and a shift in mentality as a
result of the hard realities of the current regime,
some individuals and groups in our exile community

have had difficulty in leaving the past behind. They
instead pursue political ideologies that are out of

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

ete/

touch. Whether or not there is a change of perspective among

these

exile

groups

and

individuals,

events in Iran will not wait for them to catch up.

I sincerely believe that if we are to assist our youth

in their quest for freedom, the last thing we should do
is to encumber them with irrelevant issues from the
past. I would also vigorously argue that no one, start-

ing with myself, should think that the people of Iran
should be patronized or dictated a preconceived outcome. We should trust our compatriots’ ability to

make responsible decisions for their own future.
Far too often I have heard arguments favoring

strong leadership. I have faced a lot of criticism by a
variety of people, often blaming the lack of progress
on my personal reluctance to play such an aggressive

role. I find it odd that the same people who once
blamed my father for exceeding the boundaries of his

authority and accused him of being a dictator, ended
up blaming

him

for not having acted strongly

enough to prevent the revolution from happening.
Ironically, people of a similar mentality today are
asking me to assume the very same role, forgetting

118

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

that this created the political crisis in Iran before the
revolution.

I am not certain whether such individuals have
learned the lessons of history, but I know that I have.
No matter what is said or will be said, I will not

betray my conscience and the best interests of my

country by falling into the same trap again. I do not
deny that charismatic leadership has its merits and

that someone like me could play a big part in assisting in the introduction and institutionalization of
secularism, democracy, and civil society. It is my

firm belief, however, that my greatest task as a leader
would be above all to share my experiences and
humbly provide my fellow compatriots with all the

knowledge and skills that I can offer—in essence,
teach fishing, rather than be the person who delivers

fish to their doors.
Having said that, I do not shy away from my
duties and responsibilities. I am simply suggesting

that in today’s world the leadership of just one individual is no longer feasible; that leadership must be
distributed among different layers, both vertically and

THE

INEVITABLE

horizontally.

IMPLOSION

It is with

11s

this premise

that I have

approached our struggle from day one. It will be in
this same spirit and belief that I will continue to play
my part in this collective process.

I have clearly

expressed my opinions to many leaders within our

community, and I hope that the rest of our society will
understand the merits of this approach over other tra-

ditional, but unrealistic and impractical, approaches.

The Collapse of the Regime:
Four Possible Scenarios
With a new attitude among those of us who are com-

mitted to the cause of freedom, we should be pre-

pared for a variety of possible reactions that this
regime might have at the prospect of its demise. I

suggest four basic possibilities:
The first scenario envisages a nonviolent evolu-

tionary

process

by which

the regime

gradually

evolves out of its authoritarian character, yielding
increasing

democratic

public demand.

concessions

in response

to

Eventually, a parliament votes to

hold a nationwide

referendum

on reforming and

120

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

abolishing the current constitution, and along with
it clerical rule and the Islamic republic. If once there

were arguments favoring reform of the current constitution, such an approach is falling out of favor
with each passing day. The chief reason is that, even

if the position of the supreme leader were transformed into a publicly elected office, as opposed to
the complicated web that masks the despotic nature

of it, the very idea of an infallible leader, especially
an elected one, seems quite incongruous. If he is not

truly infallible, then why should he have the final
word on all issues? And if fallible, then what is the

point of the position? Can the correctness of Islamic
law be debated, and parts of the Shari‘a be defeated
in parliament? This is damaging both to the democratic process as well as to Islam itself.

Meanwhile, by maintaining a peaceful and gradual approach to the process, the transition between

the old order and the new becomes seamless and

there is no violence or breakdown of law and order.
The most crucial element here is the readiness and

coordinated effort of all prodemocracy groups and

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

2a

organizations to work together and assume the deli-

cate

and

vital leadership

during

the transition

process. This would be the most sensitive period in
our historic evolution; any failure to manage this

phase properly will result in another catastrophe,
perhaps even graver than what happened in 1979.
The advantages of this scenario, of course, lie pre-

cisely in its peaceful nature. It avoids

a moment of

breakdown or collapse of authority and possible anarchy in the interim, and it would most likely enjoy

broad international support and encouragement, even

offers of financial assistance in the process. It is the
ideal scenario in many respects. However, one should
not be so naive as to think that our counterparts in

Tehran would

be as magnanimous.

The regime’s

track record of terrorism and assassination of political
opponents both at home and abroad makes it hard to
imagine that the clerics will agree to go that easily.

After all, few dictatorial regimes ever willingly give

up the old order—of which they are the chief beneficiaries.

It will be particularly

difficult for the

supreme leader to give up a position that is symbolic

122

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

of everything the Islamic republic stands for—trule
by clerics in the name of Islam as they see it, not to
mention material gains for its mostly corrupt leadership. Thus, in practical terms, it is unrealistic to

expect that Iran can move out of its Islamic republic
predicament quite so painlessly.
In the second scenario, the transition to a demo-

cratic regime takes place, but not so smoothly. Here

the clerics realize that the ship is sinking but are
unable to abandon it. A frustrated and angry population realizes that the process of liberalization is neither
fast nor thorough enough to satisfy urgent require=
ments, and that the regime is incapable of making a

decisive break with clerical rule. As opposition forces
mount in parliament, pressing the regime ever harder,
the regime tries to play for time. Khatami, or any

future would-be reformist, even if he: supported the
forces of reform all the way, is blocked by the hardliners and a deadlock emerges. As a result, the media

defy all censorship controls and open a broad front
against the regime—albeit

by resorting to under-

ground tactics and “night pamphlets.” International

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

1235

public opinion calls for the regime to acknowledge
widespread opposition and to step down peacefully.
Defections from the regime become widespread and

public clashes with security forces become commonplace. Large portions of the regime’s supporters lose
heart and abandon it, leaving only a hard-core resis-

tance in place. The public takes matters into its own
hands and stages demonstrations, protests, and strikes,

calling for a referendum on the future of the regime
and demanding that the supreme leader step down. In
the end the clerics are forced to yield to popular opinion and allow the people to determine a successor
regime through unrestricted parliamentary elections.
This scenario is a promising one, but also con-

tains numerous risks since it involves the collapse of
power and the serious problem of an interval of con-

frontation and transition between a past and a future
government.

The possibility of a general descent

into anarchy in the absence of legitimately constituted authority is serious.

In the third scenario, the regime resists to the bitter end, using its militias or even specially trained and

124

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

previously hidden intervention units, with complete
disregard for mass casualties. The immediate outcome

would be a militaristic and totalitarian regime that
would cancel all previous experiments with liberaliza-

tion and democracy. Reformers would be crushed and
jailed, even

assassinated.

Any pretense

of Islamic

legitimacy would vanish. The international community would obviously condemn the regime, and it

would sink into deeper isolation. Change would be
delayed indefinitely, and only a long-term armed
struggle could eliminate the regime. Although the
regime could hold on by sheer force for some time,
deteriorating circumstances

would

lead to another

revolutionary situation. Unfortunately, this very negative scenario cannot be excluded.

However

much

the international

community

condemned such a course of events, we must be real-

istic in the sense that we could not seriously rely on

physical intervention from the outside to halt or
change the internal situation. If a coalition of international forces were unwilling to intervene even to

help bring down other tyrannical regimes by direct

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

25

interference, such an intervention in Iran would be

virtually inconceivable, absent a war scenario. A real
danger, however, is that a potential foe might exploit
Iran’s internal turmoil, as we saw happen shortly

after the revolution by Iraq. Such an intervention
would almost certainly spark a foreign response. At
a minimum, one could hope for strong international

rhetorical support—official governmental condemnations and statements, United Nations resolutions,

diplomatic pressures—all on behalf of the Iranian
people in the event of a violent and irrational crackdown.

But none

of these actions will deter the

regime in the short term. Iran could be in for a prolonged period of dictatorial rule, yet again.
A fourth scenario envisages the regime deterio-

rating into internal chaos of warring factions including Mafiosi-type groups, all struggling for control
over the regime, access to power, and influence. Their

respective militias, engaged in armed combat, would
begin to move

towards serious civil war. Oppor-

tunistic, and not necessarily democratic, forces might

find backers in the military, so the whole country

126

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

could be at war until one faction succeeds in asserting
its dominance. Such a scenario would be disastrous

for the population and possibly even the infrastructure, if fighting raged in the main cities of Iran, a la
Beirut of the late twentieth century.

Worst of all would be the emergence of separatist movements,

some

representatives

of which

have already started the rhetoric of secession and
independence, which could result in a Yugoslavialike disintegration of Iran. The whole political map

of the region would have to be reassessed. Furthermore, such new alignments or newly created sovereignties might

threaten

former

Iran’s immediate

neighbors. As often seen on the European continent,

our part of the world has had its share of bad blood
as well.

As terrible and dramatic as this scenario would
be, it seems less likely since the regime’s interest in
staying in power has so far prevented any serious

internal conflict, and the military has stayed out of
politics. But it is very unlikely that democratic
forces could emerge victorious in a scenario of civil

THE

INEVITABLE

conflict

and

IMPLOSION

violence.

Under

ZU

such

victory usually goes to the most

circumstances,

powerful,

most

ruthless, and often minor, yet opportunistic, force, to
the detriment of the silent majority still committed
to democracy.

Iran, or what

would

be left of it,

would be stuck under another long bout of authoritarian rule, not necessarily better and perhaps worse
than what we have now.

The Likely Course of Events
Clearly, the first scenario—a peaceful dismantling of
the clerical regime by legal process in the parliament—is

the most desirable way to go. I would

encourage every Iranian to sincerely follow it, and I
appeal to the representatives of the current regime to

take this opportunity to abandon power peacefully.
But it is probably naive to expect the regime to go
so quietly, yielding its control of state institutions

and declaring the end of the Islamic republic.
The second scenario is much more likely, whereby

the regime drags its feet in the face of demands for
reform, and an angry population takes matters into its

128

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

own hands. There will be a nationwide call for the
regime to yield power to a self-appointed transitional
commission

or temporary

coalition government

to

hold a referendum on the future, as well as draft or

revise the appropriate constitution. I think it is likely
that a public confrontation will take place, but one
that, hopefully, will avoid a descent into serious civil

conflict or anarchy.
For this reason, my strategy for the future is
based on contingency planning for either of these
first two scenarios, and is designed to keep the situation from deteriorating into the general chaos of the
third and fourth scenarios.
The heart of my strategy towards the current

regime is to provide the ruling clerics with an oppor-

tunity for a peaceful exit from the political arena,
and to ensure that the situation remains within the
bounds of the first or second scenarios. But of course,

when you talk about an exit strategy, you have to
assume that there actually is an intention to exit on

their part. Recently, I have received specific information as to the willingness of. certain prominent

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

129

members of the regime, as well as highly ranked
members of its militia—some of whom have personally met with me—to

declare their willingness to

cooperate and help in the process.
Some people may question the sincerity of their

claims. Yet, I can relate to the actual feelings and

beliefs of a revolutionary guard, for instance, who is
about my own age and who has today realized the

consequences of what he at some point believed to be
a sacred duty. They too have witnessed the injustice
of their mentors, and are no longer willing to turn
their guns towards their innocent brethren.

I am

convinced

that

the current

leadership

knows it has largely lost the religious credentials it

once had. All they have to do is look at the election
results to see the people’s willingness to vote for anything that moves them away from clerical rule and
towards

democracy,

liberalization,

and

openness.

Not all the leadership may yet agree that clerical rule
as a concept is over, but the idea is sinking in ever

more rapidly at all levels.

130

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

A Call to the Ruling Clerics

At this point, I openly call for the ruling clerics to

permit a bona fide national referendum and to be
prepared to step down peacefully if the nation votes

against the continuation of the Islamic republic. The
clerics in leadership, more than anyone else, have to

be concerned for their own safety and welfare in the

face of what could be angry mobs bent on revenge.
Only their own security forces are able to protect

them at this point, but they are no doubt wondering
who will protect them as the system collapses.
I cannot predict what would happen under a new
republican system. If I have a leadership capacity in

the future, however, and insofar as it is within my
prerogatives as king, I am prepared to offer the clerics sanctuary and protection from likely spasms of
“revolutionary

justice”

from

aggrieved

citizens,

much like what took place in the early years of the
Islamic republic. The ruling clerics most likely realize that there is no group, political party, or national
leader in a position to protect them from the wrath

of the people in the long run. Only the monarchy, for

THE

INEVITABLE

historical

IMPLOSION

reasons,

181

has the legitimacy

and moral

strength to call for calm, restraint, and reconciliation
among

rival political groups.

The monarchy

has

never opposed religion or antagonized the clergy
over the past centuries. In a legitimate secular state,

this could continue in the future.
Indeed, I know from my own contacts with the
clergy that many of them are actually counting on
this contingency in the future to avoid just such

revenge. Having said that, I cannot and will not
preempt a legal process of judicial inquiries related
to victims’ claims against gross injustice, corruption,
and criminal action by the former authorities. By the
same token, it is evident that the accused would have

legal recourse in terms of having a right to a fair
trial with

full legal representation

in a proper

court of law. A rule of law that is founded on the
principles

Human

of the UN’s

Universal

Declaration

of

Rights is the first step in reinforcing our

democratic goal, while cynicism would be democ-

racy’s worst

enemy

allowed to develop.

and therefore should

not be

132

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

The key to success in this scenario is the position

taken by the regime’s own forces of repression, especially the militia (Basij), the Revolutionary Guards
(Pasdaran), and other special units. These coercive
forces, more than any other element in the regime,

have to be concerned about their own future. It is
true that most of them have courageously and honor-

ably defended the nation in war and suffered great
casualties. But unfortunately, some

of them were

swayed by greed and corruption, and have main-

tained certain privileges by trampling the rights of

their own brethren. If the system fails, they have reason to be concerned about what could happen to
them. They, like some of the clergy, want insurance
from a lynch mob. Many of them have given up hope

and fully realize that this system can no longer
deliver what it once promised, or could even protect
them in the end. So they especially look to some ultimate leadership, outside of this system, which can

offer such protection. This point is perhaps one of the
most significant issues directly related to the process

of a genuine and long lasting national reconciliation,

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

133

which, in my opinion, is the foundation stone for our

future prosperity, stability, and a successful democratic order.
Indeed, such offers of protection are very important to the ruling clergy and its militia, and would

likely give them real hope that even they could be
players during the transition and not necessarily its

victims. It is foreseeable that the isolated ruling clerics at the top of the pyramid would try to convince
their militia not to trust the democratic opposition,

and to believe that anybody who would enter the
scene will be absolutely and categorically dedicated to

their utter destruction. This would be their final hope

of keeping these elements from defecting. That is why
I believe an exit strategy should be offered—one that
invites all those former supporters who are now dis-

enchanted within the regime to break with it in favor

of our national movement for freedom and democracy.
What, then, is the obligation of these people if
they hope to survive the collapse of the regime? From

this moment, they must refuse to use force against
the people—as some have recently demonstrated—

134

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

against students activists, our women, our youth, or

any citizen seeking freedom and justice. The security
forces need to be seen as being on the side of the people. Once the regime perceives the defection of their

own security forces, they will understand the futility

of further resistance to popular will. Indeed, many
leaders are already buying time at the present, opting

to become observers of the scene rather than being
actively engaged in the system. More than anything

else, such widespread anxiety and disaffection within

the coercive forces of the regime indicate how fragile
and susceptible it has become.
Some elements may still believe that they must

stay with the regime to the bitter end, for three main
reasons: because they do not see any way out of the

present collapse of the system; because they still
believe the regime can hold its ground; or because
they have deep personal and material interests in

holding onto power. Once again I would remind
them that real power is ultimately in the hands of
the citizenry; they can perhaps buy some time, but
ultimately time will run out.

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

135

I am encouraged to see that the majority of the

most

menacing elements that could have been a

main obstacle to our struggle are today demonstrat-

ing their willingness to join our ranks and fight
beside us. The rest of the regime’s apparatus will

have little incentive to hold on to the very end. I

think we may be astonished at how fast the regime
implodes as these realities become clear. The more

intense the opposition becomes, the more defections
will occur.

Three Sectors of Iranian Society

with Decisive Political Influence
Who will be the key actors in the collapse of the
clerical regime? Principally, three social sectors will
play decisive roles:

The first consists of the politically active members
of the intelligentsia: students, academicians, journalists, writers,

intellectuals,

professionals,

doctors,

white-collar technocrats, and so on. These groups take
a keen interest in politics, are generally opposed to the

clerical regime, and are involved in political activity

136

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

where permitted. They will constitute the front line

in challenging the regime and demanding that the
system be opened.
Second, we have a traditional sector in Iranian

society that has historically exerted political influence

by being the principal backer of the frontline political
activists. This group is centered in the economic sec-

tor: businessmen, guilds, and workers who can be
mobilized into action in times of political tension and

confrontation. But if we are to develop a coordination
process among various antiregime elements, we must

think in advance about who does what and when dur-

ing a time of crisis, and about the sequence of actions
under different contingencies. The bazaar (Iran’s tra-

ditional economic sector) and the traditional clergy

are key players, but we probably can’t expect them to

take the initiative against the regime before the intelligentsia does and before the sharp decline of the
regime becomes quite evident. Provincial elements

and tribes are also part of this ensemble. This sector
is in a position to cause disruptions through strikes
and general civil disobedience. Ultimately they could

THE

INEVITABLE

seriously

cripple

economy—the

IMPLOSION

or

entirely

137

shut

down

the

classic warning signs and forms of

opposition we have witnessed in Iran.

Finally we have an unknown quantity in other
key social segments, such as some of the clerics
within the regime, as well as the military forces and
the Revolutionary Guards. The latter are linked at

the moment with the regime, but their actual political state of mind has yet to be publicly manifested.
The militia plays a key role in particular because it
can refuse to cooperate with the regime against the
people,

such

as crushing

student

activists

who

demand democratic rights. My aim is to reduce to a

minimum the number of elements that would fight
against us to the bitter end.
But how do we mobilize the intelligentsia and the
technocracy within the present system? How can they
press the regime, not only to exercise the rights that

they currently might have, but also to go beyond that?

We need to ensure that they will be able to express
themselves in ways that help form a true civil society.
Efforts from entities such as the Writers’ Guild or

138

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

other professional groups—medical doctors, scientists,
university professors and schoolteachers, technicians,

and other experts—need to reach a broad audience.
A tremendous pool of talent also lies within the dias-

pora, including some of the best minds the world has
seen. Together with their compatriots at home, they
should raise their voices to remind the government
that the present circumstances are utterly unaccept-

able and that we must push for decisive change. We
can therefore discourage hard-liners from any thought

of blocking popular sentiments. Foreign-based radio
and television, which have broadcast live programs to

Iran, have provided Iranians with an effective dialogue
while putting further pressure on the regime which
can no longer monopolize the airwaves.
The regime needs to be under constant pressure

from the people who will push for greater liberalization wherever there is an opening. Even an event

like a major soccer match can provide unexpected
results. When

Iran won a game during the 1998

World

Cup, crowds poured into the streets and

women

threw off headscarvesin a way that the

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

139

regime could not control. Around the time of this

writing, serious clashes erupted in a stadium fol-

lowing a match between two of the most popular
soccer teams in Tehran. The crowd chanted boldly
antagonistic slogans against the regime and called
for a national referendum. Once again, the regime

resorted to use of violent force in order to curb the
spontaneous

eruption of protest. Recently, in the

aftermath of the terrorist attack on the U.S. on
September

11, 2001,

Iranians

gathered

in large

numbers and held candlelight vigils while chanting
slogans in support of and sympathy for America. As
expected, the regime cracked down on these demonstrators. These examples have served, among other
things, a great purpose: that of separating the peo-

ple of Iran, in the eyes of the world, from their
unpopular regime.

Constant pressure from all levels of civil society
is essential. In its absence, the process could be

dragged out forever, with the government only offering small concessions here and there in order to stay
in power. Success will come only if we can lend help

140

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

to these liberal elements and activists. We can sup-

port them

by breaking the barriers of isolation

through the establishment of direct communication
and dialog with the support of various focus groups.

Unlike the past two decades, today many Iranians
are able to communicate with the external world and
even travel abroad. They get to see plainly the reality of the world with their own eyes, thus gaining
even more political sophistication and encouragement. They are further inspired to tell their stories

abroad.

Likewise, many

Iranians who

have lived

abroad for many years have a wealth of information
and suggestions to convey to their compatriots at

home—something they could better achieve by traveling to Iran.
Meanwhile, the current leadership has called for

cultural exchange. But it should not be limited to
senior policy advisors or to senior professors from one
or another American or Iranian university, but should
rather be open to all activist elements of society.
Furthermore, those in the outside world must realize

that the regime has yet to display a willingness to

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

141

conduct a civilized dialog with its own people—
never mind one with another civilization.
Overall, by bringing momentum

and direction

to the process of change, we could expect for the
world community not to remain indifferent, but to
react positively and encourage our people in their
quest. Such encouragement proved to be instrumental

for

nations

such

as

South

Africa,

Poland,

Nicaragua, the Philippines, Indonesia, and others at
a critical juncture in their struggles to eliminate
unwanted regimes or unpopular governments.
But ultimately, Iranians have to be in a position
to make

their own

decisions, and that will most

likely happen

naturally.

world

to be sensitive

needs

Meanwhile,

the outside

to this developing

process within Iran. The people will welcome inter-

national involvement and support, but not at the

expense of losing their independence and cultural
identity. Actually, similar situations exist all over the

world

today.

But

the international

community

remains a critical factor: Just how will it react?

Will it stay aloof, just looking after its own narrow

142

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

interests, or will it take a broader interest in the

problem?
Support for the people is the core issue. Graphic

images and other tangible evidence are pivotal elements at this stage. The photograph of the single

Chinese

student

standing

in front of a tank in

Tienanmen Square had great impact on world policy
towards the government in Beijing. Rioting and vio-

lence in Indonesia also affected international thinking on the future of the Suharto regime. Sustained
street demonstrations

on the streets

of Belgrade

finally forced Milosevic out of power—world indig-

nation

rendered

his stubborn

resistance

futile.

Nonetheless, as much as such support would inspire
our people, the reality is that our country’s isolation

discourages the presence of a large number of international observers, especially the world media, who

could help us tell our true story abroad. Most of the
world community does not really know what the

people of Iran actually want. Thus far, it has been
difficult to collect evidence inside the country that

could positively influence public opinion abroad.
This is bound to change, especially in the era of the

THE

INEVITABLE

Internet,

provided

IMPLOSION

that world

143

observers,

and

the

media in particular, look more towards these outlets

of public expressions rather than to limiting their
input to what the propaganda machine of the regime

feeds them.
For my part, a key role that I can and will play in
all this is to maintain and broaden contact with

diverse

elements

of the population,

opposition

groups inside and outside the country, and coordinate
some advance thinking. But I am not under any illu-

sion that I could control all these forces. They have to

be persuaded of the validity of this approach by their
own convictions and for the sake of the country’s
future. However, I will continue to provide an ele-

ment of hope and vision, based on my faith in my
compatriots’ abilities and convictions, at a time when
so many people are uncertain of what the future

holds, not knowing how Iran will emerge from this
political dead end.
Domestic Operations

I am regularly in touch with leaders inside Iran, both
through my own direct contacts and channels, and

144

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

through external opposition organizations. Many dif-

ferent types of organizations are involved. Many of
these contacts and related organizational works are

covert, particularly because there are operatives inside
Iran in sensitive roles. They form networks extending
into the regime to provide inside information which
are ready to act, when the right moment

comes, to

assist in paralyzing the regime. These activities have
to remain secret, since their revelation would obvi-

ously hurt those who are cooperating with me and
who are committed to future action. Their operations
are coordinated via underground channels that, for
the greater part, have been preserved. Knowledge of

these operatives is on a “need to know” basis, linked
to various chains of command.
It is critically important

that these activists

refrain from prematurely revealing their existence,

because actions taken against the regime while it is
still in control would have only symbolic value and
would be quickly crushed. I have always insisted on

the preservation of life and refuse to consent to any
operation solely for the sake of demonstration, at the

THE

INEVITABLE

IMPLOSION

145

expense of the premature and unjustified death of
valiant patriots. It is vital that these groups remain

committed to move only when the time is ripe and
the regime is beginning to lose control.

At this time, one of the biggest remaining hurdles
is the need for serious and widespread material and

logistical support by our community for all these networks and organizations at home and abroad. Every
single Iranian, regardless of personal wealth, can and
must, within the limits of their means, assist in this

process and partake in this struggle. Now that the

opportunity for meaningful change has finally arisen,
it is our duty to get involved and demonstrate strong
commitment to the liberation of our homeland.

CONCLUSION

|

hile I do not expect the regime to simply lie down
democratic

and allow

alternative

forces to take over, I also

! believe that many of its members are
sensible enough to grasp the reality that surrounds
them. Many have already been arrested or interro-

gated under suspicion of being in touch with me or
other

opposition

groups.

Yet

many

people

from

inside Iran are contacting me openly, with no concern

for any reprisal, thus making it increasingly hard for

the regime to make this a political offense in itself.
People, particularly the youth, are responding to

me not necessarily because of my name, but because
147

148

WINDS

OF

CHANGE

they are thirsty for new ideas, new visions, and a
future that offers personal freedoms, liberalization,

democratization, unity, and positive change. Nor is it
in the interest of the regime to push events towards a

bloodbath in which there will be no winners.
Certainly the regime will grow paranoid over discussions like this about its inevitable demise, but the

more transparent the process is, the quicker the regime

itself will perceive the direction of events and the need
to conform with powerful national sentiments.

Many

elements

are already present

to bring

about change. We have the basic resources needed to

spark it and, most importantly, a majority of citizens
willing to commit

themselves at the moment

of

truth. For my part, paramount to all other concerns,

I guarantee my best efforts and hard work and, above
all, a sincere commitment to the ideas and principles

that I have set forth in this book.
Furthermore, I continue to work with existing

political organizations, both at home and abroad.
And regarding the world community, I bring our

national message of peace and deep desire for liberty

CONCLUSION

149

and democracy to the attention of concerned governments, public or private entities, as well as academic

institutions and the media, with the hope that they
in turn adopt the Iranian cause as they have done in

the case of other reform-minded nations.
Iran is now entering one of the most dynamic

phases of its internal development. Winds of change
are blowing through the cities and villages of my
homeland. We all feel it. More than ever before, we

are ready to assert our overwhelming desire to estab-

lish a lasting democratic government for the first
time in our history.

elie rab
_

sien
eal

haa

ea tL
aS
ne
eho
rye
7

tA

Cay

nr

7,

Aot

Me

98

a

.

ee

4 as a of
a
.

x

+

*

oa Ay

7

a

Esa!
a

>
a

ay7 > 7

ae

; 6
“i

i
~~
=
+

>

oes

a

Y

af

:

>

fa

‘
Ly
>

A

>

Pal

>

Vv

©

:

be e,F

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

_| ver the years, there have been so many
people who have inspired, educated,
stimulated, challenged, helped, loved,
4

and supported me. It has been a long

journey, often lonely and at times painful, but I have

never lost sight of where I want this journey to end.

Apart from my relatives and close friends, there
are hundreds of people who have, in different ways,

affected my life and my thoughts. I cannot list them
all here, and even if I could, there are many whose

identity I cannot

divulge under current circum-

stances. One day—I hope soon—lI will be able to

publicly thank them.
151

he2

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Most importantly, my biggest source of inspiration, and what has given me heart and will to give

my life in pursuit of this cause, are the valiant youth

of Iran. Their passion and courage in facing adversity
and repression will forever be etched in history. I bow
my head to them. I have faith that they will conquer
evil, restore our stolen pride and dignity, resurrect
our national identity, and revive Iran’s glorious name
and civilization. I hope I will be there to witness it.

May God protect Iran.

ie
Paniarls
t 4

Demco, Inc. 38-293

we:
a

+
a jaded
i
pe

eel
C\

’

3:
at- ap

\

ee

7
T7)

cae

i

a

Paoge

tt

“4 *

Ae

